BEMESS
Design of Plates and Shells
SOFiSTiK | 2023BEMESS
DesignofPlatesandShells
BEMESSManual,ServicePack2023-3Build88
Copyright©2023 bySOFiSTiKAG,Nuremberg,Germany.
SOFiSTiKAG
HQNuremberg OfficeGarching
Flataustraße14 Parkring2
90411Nürnberg 85748GarchingbeiMünchen
Germany Germany
T+49(0)91139901-0 T+49(0)89315878-0
F+49(0)911397904 F+49(0)89315878-23
info@sofistik.com
www.sofistik.com
Thismanualisprotectedbycopyrightlaws. Nopartofitmaybetranslated,copiedorreproduced,inanyformorby
anymeans,withoutwrittenpermissionfromSOFiSTiKAG.SOFiSTiKreservestherighttomodifyortorelease
neweditionsofthismanual.
Themanualandtheprogramhavebeenthoroughlycheckedforerrors. However,SOFiSTiKdoesnotclaimthat
eitheroneiscompletelyerrorfree. Errorsandomissionsarecorrectedassoonastheyaredetected.
Theuseroftheprogramissolelyresponsiblefortheapplications. Westronglyencouragetheusertotestthe
correctnessofallcalculationsatleastbyrandomsampling.
FrontCover
Volkstheater,Munich Photo:FlorianSchreiberContents|BEMESS
Contents
Contents i
1 Task Description 1-1
2 Theoretical Principles 2-1
2.1 Principles, compare of different design strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.2 Bending Design of Reinforced Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.2.1 General Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.2.2 Reinforcement Meshes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-2
2.2.3 Concrete compression stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-2
2.2.4 Compression reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-2
2.2.5 Minimum reinforcement of the pressed cross sections . . . . . 2-4
2.2.6 Tendons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-4
2.2.7 Procedure of design according to Baumann (CTRL LAY 0) . . 2-6
2.2.8 Procedure of the layer design (CTRL LAY 1) . . . . . . . . . . . 2-7
2.2.9 Other Design Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-9
2.3 Service Load Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-10
2.3.1 Minimum Thickness Check of the Compression Zone . . . . . 2-10
2.3.2 Crack Width Control without Direct Calculation . . . . . . . . . . 2-10
2.3.3 Crack Width Control with Direct Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-11
2.3.4 SLS stresses, stress range, fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-11
2.4 Shear Checks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-13
2.4.1 Other Design Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-13
2.5 Punching Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-15
2.5.1 General Informations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-15
2.5.2 Column Input and Control Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-16
2.5.3 Inner, Edge and Corner Columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-17
2.5.4 Shear and Bending Design at the Column . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-18
2.5.5 Special Features at Wall Ends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-19
2.5.6 Special Features at Wall Corners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-20
2.5.7 Punching at Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-21
2.5.8 Consideration of the Prestress during Punching Check . . . . 2-21
2.5.9 Punching Check at a Three-Dimensional System . . . . . . . . 2-22
2.5.10 V-Ed analysis out of MAXIMA superposition loadcases . . . . 2-23
2.5.11 Other Design Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-24
2.6 Linear Stress Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-28
2.7 Disk structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-29
2.8 Volume elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-30
3 Input Description 3-1
3.1 Input Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
SOFiSTiK2023 iBEMESS|Contents
3.2 Input Records. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
3.3 NORM – Default Design Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-3
3.4 CTRL – Control of the Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-26
3.4.1 CORE Parallel computation control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-32
3.5 REIN – Title of the design case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-34
3.6 CRAC – Control of the Service Load Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-35
3.7 MREI – Minimum Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-37
3.8 SHFT – Offset Value for Shift Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-39
3.9 NSTR – SLS Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-40
3.10 MAT – Input of Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-44
3.11 GEOM – Input of the Cross Section. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-46
3.12 DIRE – Definition of Orthogonal Two-course Reinforcement . . . . . . . . 3-48
3.13 THRE – Definition of Skew 2- and 3-course Reinforcement. . . . . . . . . 3-50
3.14 DI3D – Definition BRIC Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-52
3.15 LAY – Definition of Multi Layer Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-54
3.16 PARA – Design Parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-56
3.17 PUNC – Punching Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-59
3.18 LC – Selection of Design Load Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-62
3.19 GRP – Selection of Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-63
3.20 ELEM – Selection of Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-64
3.21 NODE – Selection of Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-65
3.22 SELE – Selection of Punching Points. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-66
3.23 S – Input of External Forces and Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-67
3.24 EXPO – Export of the Design Parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-68
3.25 ECHO – Control of Output. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-69
ii SOFiSTiK2023TaskDescription|BEMESS
1 Task Description
TheprogramBEMESSisusedtodesignforcesoftheanalsisprogramsASEorsuperimposed
forces of MAXIMA according to various codes.
It is also capable to extract extreme stresses from a set of loadcases according to the linear
elastic theory.
Whenthedesignisperformedforseveralloadcases,theresultofthedesigncalculationrepre-
sentsthemaximumreinforcementamountwhichiscalculatedfromtheseloadcases. BEMESS
does not perform any load case superpositions. This is the task of the program MAXIMA.
Additionally to the ultimate limit design, serviceability checks can be done. This can be crack
width control, minimum reinforcement, stress and fatigue checks.
Thecompressionreinforcementforshellsanddisksiscalculatedaccordingtothestressstate.
The appropriate parameters are preset according to each code.
For circular plates, cylinders or similar structures a circular reinforcement can be defined.
Theprogramperformsapunchingcheckatpointsupports(columns)aswellasatwallcorners
and wall ends.
SOFiSTiK2023 1-1BEMESS|TaskDescription
1-2 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
2 Theoretical Principles
2.1 Principles, compare of different design strategies
SpecialeffectsinaconcreteshelldesignwerepublishedbySOFiSTiKontheMunichConcrete
Seminar 2017. A short video shows the subject and different design strategies, see:
YOUTUBE Video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wIzO8YNLCn4
The following design strategies have been compared:
• Baumann design (SOFiSTiK since 1987)
• Wood-Armer method (uniaxial design in 2 directions)
• Capra Maury (uniaxial design every 5 degree)
• Sandwich-Modell according EN-1992-2 attachment LL
• SOFiSTiK Layerdesign (consistent iteration of strain)
2.2 Bending Design of Reinforced Concrete
Three design cases are distinguished: Disks, plates and shells.
Also BRIC volume elements can be designed.
2.2.1 General Comments
In slab and shell elements the direction of the main forces usually does not fit to the direction
ofthereinforcement. Themainstressesoftenloadthereinforcementmeshwithaskewangle.
Soashearforceappearsinthereinforcementmesh. Incasetheconcretefailsduetotension,
the reinforcement allone cannot carry this shear and would deform to a rhomb. Only with
an additional compression strut in the concrete the reinforcement mesh can carry the skew
tension force, see the following figure:
n-I
n-I
Figure2.1: Reinforcementmeshonskewtension,deformationtoanrhomb,compressionstrut
You can use an otogonal mesh or a three-course and/or skew two-course reinforcement mesh
(record THRE). For circular plates a radial and a tangential orthogonal reinforcement can be
selected through the input of a centre point.
The program ASE determine the internal forces and moments in the local coordinate systems
of the plane finite elements (see appropriate manuals). In BEMESS both the directions of
the reinforcement layers and the terms ’upper’ and ’lower’ are oriented at the local coordinate
SOFiSTiK2023 2-1BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
systems;’lower’isatthesideofpositivezaxis. Particularlyinspacialsystemstheusershould
realize the characteristics of the local coordinate axis definition.
The design of the necessary reinforcement cross sections occurs according to the material
strengths and laws of the respective code.
2.2.2 Reinforcement Meshes
Inmoststresssituationstheorthogonaltwo-coursereinforcementmeshistheoptimumsolution
of the design task.
Skewtwo-coursereinforcementmeshesarechosenmostlyduetoconstructiveconsiderations.
They are static generally less effective than orthogonal nets. The steel requirement increases
morethanlinearlywiththeskewnessofthereinforcementmesh. Atwo-coursereinforcementis
only allowed for 90 up to 60 degree skewness. For higher skewness a third layer is necessary
to avoid large crack width.
Three-course reinforcement meshes are the best statical solution for the case of an elliptic
stress state (universal tension or compression): The required steel amount is minimal, i.e. it
corresponds to the required cross section of an orthogonal reinforcement mesh laid parallel
to the principal stresses. On the other hand there is no three-course solution for the case
of the hyperbolic stress states (simultaneous tension and compression). For this a radically
minimised two-course solution is sought. This is done via breaking off of this reinforcement
layer which is used least statically. The stiffening compressive concrete force which generally
must be assigned to another direction, however, is set at this place.
Figure2.2: stiffeningcompressionstrut(red)on45degreetensiononthereinforcementmesh
The loading of the heterogeneous reinforced concrete continuum is transformed according to
the compliance of the internal force equilibrium along the reinforcement directions (tension or
compression) and the stiffening compression strut of the concrete (Figure 2.2).
2.2.3 Concrete compression stress
In case the permissible compressive concrete stress is exceeded, a compression reinforce-
ment is inserted if possible. The permissible compressive concrete stress is reduced in case
of transverse tension - EN 1991-1-1 6.5.2(2). For lateral compression 100% are approved. In
theregionof0.0to0.1N/mm2 transversetensionthecompressivestrengthisreducedlinearly
from 100 % to 80 % (or 75% according to the code). This reduction can be switched off with
CTRL TENS 0.
2.2.4 Compression reinforcement
If the principal compressive force can not be carried by the concrete alone, the possibility of
compression reinforcement must be checked.
If reinforcement is available with a smaller angle, for example an angle with a 10 degree de-
viation to the principal compressive force, then this reinforcement can take up a compressive
2-2 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
force. The transverse reinforcement then gets a tensile force which can be interpreted as a
splitting force. For the equilibrium of the external loads nx, ny, nxy with the inner forces of the
concrete compressive force and the forces in the reinforcement directions it is now necessary,
thattheconcretecompressiveforceissetalittlebitskew(fromthecompressionreinforcement
away). Now the concrete compressive force is not in line with the external principal normal
force. If the angle reaches 45 degrees between the new concrete compressive force and the
principalcompressionreinforcement,thennofurtherloadscanbetakenupanymore. Nowitis
notpossibletodesignthecrosssection. Thentheerrormessage’Anglebetweencompressive
force and compression reinforcement too large’ is printed.
CTRLPFAI2canbeusedtoalleviatethismechanicallyexactprocedureandthereforetoavoid
the error message. The non absorbable concrete compressive force is then fully taken up by
reinforcement without further checks of compatibility and it is assumed, that the compressive
force of this inserted compression reinforcement is transferred to the neighbouring elements.
Usually this is possible at singular points and at re-entrant corners, but not possible at free
edges!
To clear this effect following a column that is loaded uniaxially over β c. If only a reinforcement
mesh on 45 degrees is available, also a high reinforcement can not hold the uniaxial principal
compressive force, since the reinforcement mesh is deformed stressfree to a rhombus, see
Figure 2.3 middle. To brace the reinforcement mesh a stiffening tensile force would be nec-
essary but the concrete cannot carry that. On the right side the behavior with CTRL PFAI2 is
shown. Herethesameloadcanbecarriedbecausetheforcenotbecarriedbyconcreteisjust
transformedincocompressionreinforcementwiththeassumptionthattheneighbourelements
can support this reinforcement compresssion.
P P>β c
PP>>ββ
cc
CTRL
PFAI 2
Figure2.3: Columnwith45degreereinforcementmesh,rightprocesswithCTRLPFAI2
Afterthistheoreticalexamplenowtwopracticalones. InFigure2.4awindowopeningisshown
on the left. In case the concrete compression strength is exceeded in the element right above
the corner, the reinforcement can help and carry a part of the loading. A compression force
inthereinforcementinthiselementcanbetransferedtoneighbouringelementsandanchored
there. So in this example an input CTRL PFAI 2 can help to design this singularity at the
re-entrant corner using compression reinforcement.
But in general this method is not allowed. E.g. at the support of a wall girder, the support
compression would point to the support under 45 degree and the ortogonal reinforcement
mesh could not carry additional compression. The horizontal bars point to a free boundary
where a bar compression (D) could not be anchored. In this example the input of CTRL PFAI
2 would be wrong or at least problematic.
The stress in the compression reinforcement is limited to a stress at 2 o/oo, that gives -400
SOFiSTiK2023 2-3BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
σ >β c D
(D)
D
Figure2.4: left: windowopening(PFAI2useful)-right: wallgirder(PFAI2problematic)
N/mm2 in most cases. Reason:
In the shell design the forces are converted to a normal force in an upper disc and a normal
force in a lower disc (Baumann method) - see Figure 2.7
Then these discs are treaded as centric loaded parts and we limit the stress according EN-
1992.1.1 6.1 (5) to a stress at 2 o/oo.
This is not exactly the meaning of the code but it is on the safe side.
2.2.5 Minimum reinforcement of the pressed cross sections
Walls designed with BEMESS are considered always as ”reinforced walls”.
A minimum reinforcement can be demanded, e.g. 0.8% of the statically necessary cross sec-
tion (see record MAT ... AM3) . The minimum reinforcement calculation occurs in the direction
of the principal stresses. The skew reinforcement is considered with the square of the cosine
of the angular deviation.
2.2.6 Tendons
Forbondedtendonsthestressincreaseinthetendonsistakenintoaccountwherethetendons
aresmearedoveracertainwidth,seeCTRLSIGZandWTEN.WithCTRLSIGZ0thetendons
can be switched off totally in the bending design.
The decompression strain is only calculated in real hit quad elements. But in the element
designalsoneighboringelementswithoutrealhittendonsgetaneffectofthesmearedtendon
area.
Using CTRL LAY 0 (version 2016) tendons are only taken into account in ULS and only by
reducing the necessary longitudinal reinforcement (no effect on lever arm...).
Using CTRL LAY 1 bonded tendons are taken into account in the anylsis of the strain state in
all SLS and ULS checks. A separate output table informs about the strain and stress state in
the tendons. In ULS the element with the maximum loading is plotted showing the maximum
concrete compression strain at the right cube face. In SLS the right cube face points into the
direction of the (major) tendons to better check decompression (check area in blue).
The maximum tendon stress in the cracked section can only be stored for WINGRAF, if a cor-
responding ASE run is given with LC ... PERC ’PERM’, usually the 4000-LC of CSM for traffic
opening, see created csm32_slab_design_desi.dat file in example csm32_slab_design.dat.
In case the loadcases include pk-inf and pk-sup, please notice in the tendon stresses:
2-4 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
Figure2.5: Tendonsindecompressioncheck
- the storage of the max. tendon stress for WINGRAF is done without pk-sup in the static
determined part NP0, that means:
- the permanent tendon stress from LC 4000 PERM does not include a change due to pk-
inf/pk-sup, only the little stress part from traffic includes a pk-inf/pk-sup part!
Different bond behaviour of prestressing and reinforcing steel are implemented in the crack
design EN 1992-1-1 7.3.3 and 7.3.4 and fatigue 6.8.2 (6.64).
In some countries e.g. Germany then the reinforcement stress is increased due to the tendon
bond, e.g. DIN-EN 1992-1-1 7.3.3 (2) (NA.7.5.3).
With CTRL SIGZ 999 V2 0.45 the value xi (Ratio of bond strength between tendons and rein-
forcing steel 6.8.2 table 6.2) can be set e.g. to 0.45.
With CTRL SIGZ 999 V2 0 the tendon area is not taken into account for the analysis of the
effective ro ratio EN 1992-1-1 7.3.4 (7.10). Then also no increase of reinforcement stress due
to tendon bond is done.

V Vy
Figure2.6: TendonductreductioninthesheardesignaccordingEN1992-1-16.2.3(6)
Figure 2.6 explains the tendon duct reduction in the shear design. Teh shear check is alqays
done in the main shear force direction. In case the direction of the main shear force points in
lokal x, at side Vx the width bw is reduced according EN 1992-1-1 6.2.3 (6). For a direction of
the main shear force in lokal y, BEMESS reduces the width according a beam section with an
opening by a factor duct-diameter/d.
For a skew direction the two parts are added with sinus2 und cosinus2.
With CTRL BTEN 2 V2 0 this reduction can be switched off.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-5BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
2.2.7 Procedure of design according to Baumann (CTRL LAY 0)
This reinforcement design is based on the method described by Baumann (Der Bauingenieur
47 (1972), pages 367-377). It looks a little bit similar to the sandwich-modell of EN-1992-2
annex LL.
DB
0.35 D
0.30 D z
0.35 D
Z
Figure2.6:Fictitiousdisksandleverarminthebaumanndesign
Figure2.7: Fictitiousdisksandleverarminthebaumanndesign
The moments m-xx, m-yy and m-xy as well as the membrane forces n-xx, n-yy and n-
xy are converted to effective membrane forces acting on fictitious disks with a thickness of
0.35·construction element thickness at the outer shell side, see figure. The loading consists
of force pairs divided up into bending moments and halved membrane forces. The lever arm
of the internal forces required for the decomposition of the bending moments is not assumed
according to BAUMANN. It is calculated at the basis of full utilisation of the compressive zone.
Forthistheleverarmisdeterminedfortwocharacteristicdirections(theprincipalbendingmo-
mentdirectionandtheprincipalnormalforcedirection). Thesmallerleverarmisusedthenfor
the segmentation of the moment into membrane forces.
For approximately centrically pressed shells the cross section could not be used completely
due to the limit of the equivalent thickness of 0.35·h. Therefore in this case the equivalent
thickness is increased for centrically pressed shells up to the value 0.5·thickness·SC1/SC2.
The 0.35·thickness is applied from an eccentricity e/d >0.20. For a smaller eccentricity it will
be interpolated.
The mesh reinforcement design occurs separately for the two fictitious disks at the shell/slab
outer sides.
Hereoncemorethewholeprocess: foreachreinforcementlayeraseparateleverarmisused:
1. In the direction of the main bending moments as well as in the direction of the main
normal forces the lever arm is calculated separately. The unfavorable laver arm is taken
−→ leverarm z
2. With this leverarm z the fictive disc forces Ax,Ay,Axy are calculated on the considered
shell side:
Ax =Nx/2 + Mx/z
Ay =Ny/2 + My/z
Axy=Nxy/2 + Mxy/z
2-6 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
3. For these disc forces the main forces AI and AII are computed.
4. Then the angle deviation alpha of these main forces to the reinforcement directions are
calculated.
5. With this angle deviation the increase factors fx/f1 are calculated according to Baumann.
This leads to the disc forces in the reinforcement directions f_as1 (fx) and f_as2 (fy).
These forces can be printed in BEMESS with ECHO DMOM.
6. As the reinforcement can only carry uniaxial tension, a concrete force Db is necessary to
bracethereinforcementmeshforshearforces −→ concrete” inthedesignmomenttable.
Normal compression forces are also included in the output concrete”.
It is checked if the concrete can carry this compression. Otherwise a compression
reinforcement is calculated if possible (−→ CTRL TENS and CTRL PFAI).
7. In case of tension these disc forces are just divided by the allowable steel fyd stress to
get the necessary reinforcement: required.as1 = f_as1/fyd
8. In case of a 2D slab analysis the design moments (moments in the direction of the rein-
forcement = ECHO DMOM) are directly stored for graphical plots, see WINGRAF design
designmoments
For3DspacialshellsytemswithCTRLDMOM8000(offset8000)loadcasescanbestored
with the so called ’woodarmer’ design-forces:
Attention; stored in local quad direction, this is not the reinforcement direction for skew
input! CTRL DMOM has nothing to do with ECHO DMOM!
These woodarmer forces can be found in WINGRAF Resuls-Quad-Forces
mxx = mxx +- mxy sign +- depending on sign of mxx
nxx = nxx +|nxy|always positive to get max. reinforcement tension
Of course the same procedure is done for myy and nyy:
myy = myy +- mxy sign +- depending on sign of myy
nyy = same procedure - but the loadcase title is for both cases only mxx +- |mxy|
These comparison forces are rather similar to the ’Baumann’ method but cannot indicate
a concrete compression failure. This is done much more precisely in BEMESS in the
main compression direction, taking into account also an additional compression force
stiffening the reinforcement mesh. In general the reinforcement mesh has not the same
direction as the main compression stress.
9. On CTRL SLS V2 0 these disk forces are also used for checks and stresses in SLS. On
CTRL SLS V2 1 the strain state is iterated uniaxial, see chapter Service Load Checks -
CAPRA-Maury.
2.2.8 Procedure of the layer design (CTRL LAY 1)
See also YOUTUBE Video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3dVC6tCSH8
SOFiSTiK2023 2-7BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
This method was completely new implemented in version 2018 and works with an exact itera-
tion of the strain state. This method is called ’layer design’ in SOFiSTiK. It can also be used in
the ULS design but it is not the default because it requires much more calculation time.
In the layer design the 6 strain parameter (3 strains εx, εy, εxy and 3 curvatures κx, κy, κxy)
are calculated iteratively to achieve equilibrium between the 6 inner forces and the 6 external
forces nx,ny,nxy,mx,my,mxy. Thereby nonlinear work laws are taken into account for concrete
andsteel. Insidethereinforcementareanoconcretestressisapplied. Onbiaxialcompression
of concrete the poisson ratio is used. On uniaxial compression with transverse tension the
poisson ratio is not taken into account, because the concrete only works uniaxial parallel to
the crack. A further crack opening happens without poisson ratio effect. A concrete tensile
strength is not taken into account - not even in the crack design as we are interested in the
calculated crack width in the crack section.
As all components are taken into account using the strain and curvature tensor, also the com-
patibility is observed as in the Baumann design. So a tension force acting under 45 degree on
a reinforcement mesh causes a necessary compression strut in the concrete.
Figure2.8: Realstressdistributionasaresultofthelayerdesign(kinkduetomueanalysis)
For the stress plot of the most forced element in a first check the maximum main concrete
compression strain is searched (top or bottom). The stresses in this direction are shown at
the right face of the plot cube. At the left face the maximum of the corresponding concrete
transverse stress and a possible skew compression is plotted. This is favorable to recognize a
skewcompressionstrutstiffeningthereinforcementmeshasthedirectionofmaincompression
may turn over the height. The left concrete stress plot may also have a kink due to the effect
that the poisson ration is only taken into account in case of biaxial compression!
In case enough reinforcement is already defined coming from the ULS, the SLS procedure is
relatively clear: with 6 target forces the 6 variable strain parameter are tuned. The iteration is
controlled using a Chrisfield iteration method based on residual forces.
In the ULS design the procedure is much more complex because a starting reinforcement is
missing. Inthebeginningoftheiterationthestrainsincreasesignificantly,thecrackedconcrete
cannot carry the loading. Then the program inserts reinforcement using panelty functions. An
additional target appears to meet strain limits. If reinforcement is increased usually a strain
limit of 25 Promille is the optimum. In case of compression problems at the compression face
the tensile strain must be reduced. On further loading also compression reinforcement can be
inserted to achieve equilibrium.
Summary: Using the consistent strain iteration, the layer design can replace the up to now
successful Baumann design. Mainly in the limit range of ULS design the layer design can
2-8 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
deliver more accurate results.
In the SLS the layer design delivers more accurate results than the up to now used uniaxial
Capra-Maurymethod. EspeciallyinposttensionedstructurestheCapra-Maurymethodcannot
well map the real biaxial stress state.
Tendons can now be integrated realistic in the strain analysis also in the analysis ot the lever
arm (waste-product of the iteration of the strain state) - see tendons.
2.2.9 Other Design Codes
Special features for modern codes based on EN-1992
Depending on the country, different boxed values are set. Important is the factor α-cc (fcd=α-
cc*fck/γ c). Please check the BEMESS material output!
Special features of the BS EN 1992-1-1:2004
- Special values for v1 acc. 6.2.3(3) (6.10.aN)
Special features of the Swedish BBK 04
Important is here the additional safety coefficient gamma-n in dependence on the safety class
(1,2 or 3). The safety class is defined in program AQUA via record NORM at CAT:
NORM S BBK-04 CAT 1: gamma-n=1.00
CAT 2: gamma-n=1.10
CAT 3: gamma-n=1.20
To change the safety class, an AQUA run with only an input for record NORM can be set in
front of the BEMESS.
Special features of the Danish DS 411
- Bilinear material curve for reinforced concrete according to
3.1.2-(3)P + 3.1.4-(3)P
Special features of the Italian Decreto Ministeriale per le Costruzioni 2005
Concrete safety factor 1.90 [ with alfa-cd = 1.0]
Special features of the Swiss SIA 262:2013
Crack check: in 4.4.2 it is recommended to reduce the steel stress accordning figure 31.
This can be done in BEMESS with an input of PARA-SSO and a check with CRAC WK
TAB. If the user inputs a specific crack width (e.g. CRAC WK 0.15), the analysis of crack
width according EN-1992 7.3.4 is done. If this is not possible, shear reinforcement is in-
serted. AccordingSIA 262:2013, 4.3.3.4.3thecompressionstrudangleisanalysedbetween
25−45◦.
Hint
Please note that in BEMESS, β=90◦ →snβ=1.0
SOFiSTiK2023 2-9BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
Special features of the Russian SNiP SP 63.13330.2012
The concrete strength FC (Rb) and FCTK (Rbt) (see program AQUA record CONC) are re-
duced with an additional factor for short term/long term loading that can be set with CTRL
SNIP, default is 0.9 (long term loading). Steel is only used bilinear up to FY, for shear FP is
used for Rs.
Special features according to American Standard ACI
AccordingACI318-14astrengthreductionfactorof0.65-0.9accordingTabelle21.2.1isused,
depending on the situation bending, bending+compression or compression alone.
Special features of the Australian AS 5100 and AS 3600
The strength reduction factor SRF is taken into account according to the table 2.3 AS 3600.
bending SRF=0.6 - 0.8, shear SRF=0.7
2.3 Service Load Checks
If requested with the input, the following checks are performed after each other. If necessary
the reinforcement is increased which is requested statically by the appropriate amount.
2.3.1 Minimum Thickness Check of the Compression Zone
The check for a compression zone height can be done specially on slabs. In spacial systems
with tensile normal forces the check usually failes in many elements because in the region of
zero bending moment the sections are fully tension stressed.
Therefore the check is done using a simple slab without normal force. Then the check gives a
minimum reinforcement out of geometrical restrictions:
Assuming a strain at the compression face, a well defined strain in the reinforcement appears
using XMIN
- With this strain in the reinforcement and the E-modulus of steel we get an allowable steel
stress
- With the concrete strain and the concrete E-modulus we get a compression force on XMIN
- The reinforcement must carry this force with the allowable steel stress
- The first assumed strain is cut away
So the necessary minimum reinforcement is independant of the first assumed strain and only
depending on the Geometrie and the ration of E-moduli.
(Only CTRL LAY 0 uses the old method of BEMESS version 2016 - see manual of 2016)
The check is requested with an input XMIN in the record CRAC.
2.3.2 Crack Width Control without Direct Calculation
The check limits the available steel stress in the serviceability state to a permissible value.
The permissible value comes from a code depending table depending on the bar diameter or
can be input directly in PARA-SSU! With PARA-SSU a check can be done for the table of bar
spacing! Usage:
If a permissible steel stress is input via PARA-SSU, this value is taken. Otherwise the permis-
2-10 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
sible steel stress is calculated based on the tabel bar diameter.
If the check for the bar diameter table is not implemented vor a specific code, the check can
always be done by direct input of the steel stress in PARA-SSU.
It is assumed a crack formation through load. A crack internal force e.g. for a minimum rein-
forcement must be requested in MREI.
Forthickplatesthelimitdiametersareincreasedaccordingtothestandard. Forarbitrarycrack
widths an interpolation inside the table is done.
In the Baumann design CTRL LAY 0 tendons are not taken into account in the crack design.
Inthelayerdesignastressincreaseofbondedtendonsistakenintoaccountintheiterationof
the strain state (can be switched off with CTRL SIGZ 0).
Incaseastressincreaseinbondedtendonsoccuredinthetensilezoneintheeffectivetension
area Ac,eff, in the german DIN EN 1992-1-1 the steel stress of the reinforcement in this direc-
tion is increased according (NA.7.5.3) - in all other codes not! In the crack design itself, for all
codesbondedtendonsinAc,effaretakenintoaccountaccordingEN1992-1-17.3.4(7.10),in-
dependantof150mmruleof7.3.2(3). Thisruleiswrittenfortheminimumreinforcementbutfor
the minimum reinforcement tendons are not taken into account in BEMESS. The bond values
are taken from 6.8.2 table 6.2.
The check is requested with the input WK TAB in the record CRAC. Example see be-
mess6_design.dat
2.3.3 Crack Width Control with Direct Calculation
If the simple check according to the tables is not sufficing, a direct calculation can occur with
the default of the permissible crack width. For EN codes also equation 7.14 of EN 1992-1-
1 7.3.4(3) is taken into account (except Germany and Austria). If the check is not explicitly
programmed in BEMESS for a specific code, the check is done based on eurocode. For this
please check the protocol of the design parameters in the output.
Themethodofdirectcalculationofcrackwidthshouldbeusedespeciallyinbridgedesign. For
normal buildings, the limitation of the crack width without direct calculation according to the
tables is recommended.
In case of a LAY multilayer reinforcement, the layers are averaged with their force component.
Maybethemostouterlayerwithas1=20cm2/mhasasteelstressof200N/mm2undthenext
innerlayerwithsamedirectionwithas3=10cm2/mhasasteelstressof140N/mm2,weapply
27cm2/m(20cm2/m+10*140/200=27cm2/m,as3reducedduetolowersteelstress). Inthe
samewaythecenterofthetensionforceind-eff(effectiveheight)isherecalculatedto50.4mm
(40*20+80*7/27). Thecrackwidthisthencalculatedaccordingtothecrackformularswiththe
(in the same way) averaged bar diameter using the averaged steel stress of 184.4N/mm2
(200*20+140*7 / 27). ac-eff is usually taken as 2.5*d-eff.
The direct analsis ot crack width is requested with an input WK PARA in the record CRAC.
2.3.4 SLS stresses, stress range, fatigue
With NSTR various SLS stress checks can be done.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-11BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
ε σ
c−eƒƒ
s3=10cm2/2 σ3 d3=80mm
s−eƒƒ
s1=20cm2/2 σ1
deƒƒ =50.4mm
d1=40
Figure2.9: Crackwidthdesignonmultilayerreinforcement
WithoutinputtoCTRLLAYtheSLSstressanalysisusesthelayerdesignwiththemechanically
consistent approach of the iteration of the biaxial strain state. This method does not use sim-
plifications or modified analysis methods like Baumann or Capra-Maury but is based only on
structuremechanicalbasicsandthematerialworklaws. Thenall6forcesnx,ny,nxy,mx,my,mxy
are brought to equilibrium with the corresponding 6 strains in one iteration.
With CTRL SLS V2 also the old methods can be set:
V2=0 : SLS with substitute forced according Baumann
V2=1 : uniaxial design every 5 degree according Capra-Maury
In each element the stresses in concrete and steel are calculated for all loadcases with a
uniaxuial iteration of the strain state in 36 directions (all 5 degree)
V2=2 : mechanically consistent layer design (default)
1
2
3
4
Figure2.10: Capra-Maurydesign
In the Baumann and Capra-Maury method tendons are not taken into account in the stress
analysis. In the layer design a stress increase of bonded tendons is taken into account in the
iteration of the strain state (can be switched off with CTRL SIGZ 0).
In the layer design also the different bond behaviour of prestressing and reinforcing steel is
taken into in the steel stress range according EN 1992-1-1 6.8.2 (6.64). For this tendons are
taken into accound inside 2.5*d1 with d1=axis surface distance of the bar.
With CTRL SIGZ 999 V2 0.45 the value xi (Ratio of bond strength between tendons and rein-
forcing steel 6.8.2 table 6.2) can be set e.g. to 0.45. With CTRL SIGZ 999 V2 0 the increase
of reinforcement stress due to tendon bond can be switched off.
2-12 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
2.4 Shear Checks
Ashearcheckisperformedforplatesandshells. ThecriticalshearforceVisdeterminedfrom
the shear forces VX and VYvia a geometrical addition. This shear force, divided by the lever
arm of the internal forces (see bending design), results in the effective shear stress τ 0.
Theoutput includesthe shearzone, the existingshear stress τ 0 andpossibly theshear stress
τ which has to be considered. Perpendicular links are assumed during the calculation of the
required shear reinforcement. The shear reinforcement can be output in reference to an area
(cm2/m2) or to the elements (cm2).
ThesheardesignaccordingtoEN-1992andmostmoderncodesisbasedontwodesignvalues
of the sustainable shear force:
• VRd,c:
Design value of the sustainable shear force without shear reinforcement
• VRd,m:
Maximum design value of the sustainable shear force with shear reinforcement, which can
be sustained without failure of the fictitious compression concrete strut. If this value is
exceeded by the existing shear stress Vsd, the cross section can not be designed.
If shear links are necessary, a minimum shear reinforcement is calculated according to the
code.
In BEMESS the method with variable compression strut inclination is implemented. The com-
pression strut inclination is determined in this case according to the utilization degree.
As VRd,cdepends on the longitudinal reinforcement, for first V>VRd,cthere are two possibilities
- either compute shear reinforcement or increase longitudinal reinforcement to increase VRd1.
This can be controlled with CTRL ro_v for the overall slab or with PUNC ro_v for punching
regions. Example of an input ( bemess6_design.dat ):
CTRLRO_V0.5 $Theprogramattemptsnottouseanyshearreinforcement
$uptothisbendingreinforcementratio.Theshearcheck
$increasesperhapsthebendingreinforcementuptothisvalue.
PUNCro_v1.50 $forpunchingdesing
During the calculation of VRd,c and the compression strut inclination the available longitudinal
tensileandlongitudinalcompressivereinforcementaswellasthenormalforcetobeincludedin
the principal shear force direction are considered. Reinforcements are considered in this case
with the square of the cosine of the angular deviation to the principal shear force direction.
2.4.1 Other Design Codes
Special features for codes based on EN-1992:
Following boxed values are used depending on the code:
- 6.2.2(1) Shear VRd,ct analysis
- 6.2.3(2) max. compression angle cot0
SOFiSTiK2023 2-13BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
Special features of the BS EN 1992-1-1:2004
- No minimum shear reinforcement.
- Minimum value for vrdc: vmn+k1*σ cp according to 6.2.2(1) (6.3N)
in normal shear design
ThesheardesignaccordingtotheoldBritishStandard(notBS-EN1992)occurslikethecheck
according to old EC2. The from the concrete alone sustainable shear stress v-c is determined
in this case in dependence on the bending reinforcement in principal shear force direction
according British Standard Table 3.9.
Special features OENORM B 4700 - difference to EC2
Unlike the original EC2 the standard method in the shear design which shows a smaller shear
reinforcement at weak loaded cross sections may not be employed here. The compression
strut inclination beta is limited to 0.6 (according to B4700 equation 23).
Special features French Design Code BAEL 91 Revision 99 - difference to EC2
Shear design ass = γ s · (τ-u-0.3ftj · k)/(0.9fe)
max. shear stress 0.2fcj/γ b or 5 MPa (compression strut)
Special features Italian Design Code D.M.9 genniao 1996 - difference to EC2
Plates without shear design are allowed to
V ≤ 0.25·ƒ ·r·(1.0+50·ρ)·b ·d·δ
Sd ƒcd 
otherwise shear design with VSd ≤ Vcd + Vd
with Vcd = 0.60fctd · b · d · δ
max. shear force 0.3fcd· b · d
minimum shear reinforcement min-Vd = 0.5 · Vsd
Special features Swiss Code SIA 262
In shear design, without increase of longitudinal reinforcement it is possible that bending rein-
forcement plastifies, so an increased epsv acc. 4.3.3.2.3 (39) is used. Dmax is set to 32 mm.
Value kc is set to 0.55 (4.2.1.7).
Incasetheshearcheckneedslongitudinalreinforcementuptoro_v(seectrlro_v),equations
4.3.3.2.2 (38) and 4.3.3.2.1 are used. Then an elastic behavior of the longitudinal reinforce-
ment is assumed as more than necessary longitudinal reinforcement is present. If this is not
possible, shear reinforcement is inserted. According 4.3.3.4.3 the compression strud angle
is analyzed between 25-45 degree. If shear reinforcement is necessary, a minimum shear
reinforcement is used according 5.5.2.2 (110) (see 5.5.3.3). The maximum shear strength is
checked acc. 4.3.3.4.6.
Special features of the Russian SNiP SP 63.13330.2012
ForshearcheckofplatesnoshearreinforcementisuseduptoQb accordingtoequation(8.57).
For this c is taken to 1.0·h0. On higher shear force, links are provided according to (8.58) with
variable compression (c = 2.0·h0 , controllable with CTRL COTT). The minimum shear links
2-14 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
are considered with qs ≥ 0.25·Rbt·b. The maximum shear capacity is limited with equation
(8.55).
Special features of the Swedish BBK 04
The shear check is done according to the alternative model which is described in BBK
04-3.7.3.7. As for DIN-Fachbericht a minimum value vmin is used for the concrete bearing
capacity. For the shear check the program attempts to increase the member resistance VRdc
via an increase of the longitudinal reinforcement up to RO_V (see CTRL RO_V) in order to
refuse a shear reinforcement. If a shear reinforcement is necessary, an optimal inclination
compression strut is determined according to 3.7.4.3d. However, this compression strut
inclinationbecomesnotsmallerthancot-teta≤1.5duetoBBK04-figure3.7.4.3b. Ifshearlinks
necessary, they are designed to fs=fst according to 3.7.4.3f. A minimum shear reinforcement
is not checked.
Special features according to American Standard ACI
In the shear design according ACI 318-14 a strength reduction factor of 0.75 for shear is used
(ACI 318-14 Table 21.2.1). A minimum shear reinforcement is taken into account if necessary
according ACI 318-14 Table 9.6.3.3.
Special features of the Australian AS 5100 and AS 3600
ForsheardesignBEMESStriestoavoid,ifpossible,theshearreinforcementbyincreasingthe
longitudinal tension reinforcement up to CTRL RO_V.
If this is not possible, for V>0.5*SRF*Vuc the shear reinforcement is designed with a variable
concrete compression angle according to AS 3600 8.2.10. The minimum shear reinforcement
istakenintoaccountaccordingtoAS36008.2.8. SRFisherethestrengthreductionfactor(for
shear SRF=0.7).
Special features of the Danish DS 411
- Without shear reinforcement: if τ Sd < β * τ 0d according to 6.2.2(1) similar to EC2-vrdct
- Otherwisefullsheardesignwithoptimumcompressionangleviacompressioncapacityacc.
6.2.2.1(14)P - (17)P
- Minimum compression angle cot-theta: according to 6.2.2.1(9)(a):
2.0 for curtailed reinforcement = default in BEMESS MAT-K1S
2.5 if not curtailed: input in BEMESS-MAT-K1
- Without minimum shear reinforcement for slabs (6.4.3.1 (4)P only for beams)
2.5 Punching Checks
2.5.1 General Informations
Precondition
Load cases with support reactions have to be contained in the indicated load cases. If the
internal forces and moments from the program MAXIMA are designed, the program BEMESS
has to be informed also about the load case of the extreme support reactions (record LC).
The use of boundary elements for linear wall support is the precondition for the automatic
identification of wall ends and wall corners. An elastic edge support is recommended. The
SOFiSTiK2023 2-15BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
stiffnessofthislinearedgesupportresultstoc=E·D/h(withh=wallheight)inthiscaseandcan
be input generally with approximate 500000 kN/m for the usual building constructions. Indeed
aPZsupportwithanadditionaloutputedgeelementispossible,however,highsingularcorner
moments which depend on the element mesh strongly are calculated then at the re-entrant
corners!
Processing
The program searches then single support nodes (single columns) and wall ends as well as
wall corners and performs a punching check for these points.
The punching force at single support node uses the technique of connecting forces according
Figure 2.17. At wall corners or edges a perimeter cut is analyzed, see section wall ends.
Nodes with less than 5 kN support reaction are not considered! This has to be considered for
the control of the punching points (with program WING ”QUAD ASPS SCHH 0.20”)!
Within the punching area the plate shear design is replaced then by a punching check. The
elements lying within this area get then at least the for the punching check necessary upper
longitudinal reinforcement. If the bending design shows a higher longitudinal reinforcement,
this becomes determinent. A normal plate shear design occurs outside of the punching area.
Studrails: see PUNC KPU.
Incaseofacolumnheadtheprogramverifiesthepunchingintheinnerandouterpart. Exam-
ple see bemess7_columnhead.dat.
With ECHO PUNC EXTR a plot ot the punching sitiuation can also be requested if no shear
reinforcement is necessary.
So that a necessary shear reinforcement will not forget in the graphics, all points have the
shear reinforcement in the punching area, also the points directly about the column!
If no column dimensions are input, BEMESS uses a rectangular column with d=b=plate thick-
ness (however, not larger than 30 cm) as default. Column dimensions possibly defined in the
data base are accepted (Slabdesigner).
With ECHO PUNC FULL a detailed output is printed per column.
2.5.2 Column Input and Control Parameters
UsuallythecolumnparametersaresetinthegraphicalinputofastructuralpointinSOFIPLUS.
These parameters are used in BEMESS.
In special cases they can be modified in a manual input PUNC where the columns can be
assigned by means of the supporting coordinates X and Y (mesh-independent). But also a
node number can be input on TYPE.
The program attempts to perform first of all the punching check without shear reinforcement.
If bending reinforcements more than REIN (default 1.5 %) results, so the program changes to
punching check with shear reinforcement.
Controlparameters onpunchingcan alsobeinput inaseparate TEDDYtaskin frontof aSSD
2-16 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
Task design, example see SELE
2.5.3 Inner, Edge and Corner Columns
For edge and corner columns the effective perimeter is reduced based on a sector method. In
addition the punching force is increased by a beta factor.
BEMESSdeterminesitselftheeffectiveroundcutautomatically,whenitiscontrolledwhetherin
individualsectorsaroundthecolumnblockoutsoredgesaretobefound. Itappliesinthiscase
individual sector areas like for the block load analysis. If for a sector area plate elements are
usedwith100%,thesectorisconsideredaseffectiveforthepunching. Currently72sectorsare
arranged with 5 degrees per sector. The search sectors extend from dS/2 to dS/2+6·effective
depth.
Infig. 2.11thesectors1,2+4arenotcoveredcompletely. Sector1+2findstheboundary,sector
4 finds the opening. The program can not differ between boundary and opening but the fact
thattwoactivesegmentsuoccurindicatesthattheremustbeanopening. Thenthecatchedu
is taken as the active perimeter. Without opening the active perimeter may be elongated up to
the real boundary according EN 1992-1-1 figure 6.15. You find this in the full punching listing
marked with ”+ boundary spacing”.
Sector Method:
1
2
Boundary
of slab
u 3
u
Search sector 4
outer radius
6* dS
Search sector Opening
inner radius d
Figure2.11: Sectormethodtofindtheactiveperimeter
The sector method delivers the effective perimeter u of the punching round cut. The ratio u/u0
is output in % in the result list.
Acolumnisconsideredasaninsidecolumnfrom1.00·u0to0.80·u0.,asanedgecolumnfrom
0.80·u0 to 0.50·u0, as a corner column smaller 0.50·u0.
In case a point lies exactly on the boundary we assume that this is only done to simplify the
analysis model and the outer column face is alligned with slab boundary in reality. So the
SOFiSTiK2023 2-17BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
perimeter is elongated by 2*half column width in that case, see EN 1992-1-1 figure 6.15. In
case the point lies a little bit inside the slab, the length of an exact perimeter at distance 2d is
used.
According to the standard the shear stressin the perimeter cut determined with u is increased
with a beat factor for the rough consideration of not axisymmetric bending loading. Using
CTRL WINT 0 the program calculates this eccentricity value beta according EN 6.4.3 (6.39).
BEMESS extracts a restraint column bending moment also in case of a simple pz-supported
slabusingtheshearforcedistributionaroundthepunchingnode. Ifthecolumnisreallyrestraint
with a rotational spring or a column beam the real restraint moment is used to calculate the
beta value according EN 6.4.3 (6.39). The loadcase with the maximum product of Vz*beta will
bedesignedforpunching. Thisbetamethodisperformedforalldesigncodes-eveniftheydo
not note it explicitely.
Usually we have a biaxial bending moment MX+MY. Thus also for international codes the
extended german formula (NA 6.39.1) is used to combine both Mx and My. The function W1
according (6.40) is analyzed for the active part of the perimeter, also for edge and corner
columns. In general the beta value is limited to 1.80 to avoid unrealistic high values. At edge
andcornercolumnsoftenhighbetavaluesarecomputed. Butastheperimeterisalreadyhighly
reduced at these columns, BEMESS uses the flat (approximate) values according EN 6.4.3(6)
Figure 6.21N for edge and corner columns (by default). This behavior can be controlled with
CTRL BETA.
The beta value can also be set manually for every punching node with PUNC ... BETA but for
security on edge and corner columns at least the flat value is used.
2.5.4 Shear and Bending Design at the Column
Withinthepunchingareatheregularplatesheardesignisomittedandreplacedbythepunch-
ing check.
Thehighnodemomentinasingularsupportednodeisreducedwithdelta-m=A/8·bmin/bmax
(A = maximum support reaction, bmin, bmax = smaller, larger column dimension). It is con-
sidered,thatforbiaxialmomentloading(mI=mII)thesupportpressurecanbedeterminedonly
in each case to a half for a mI and a mII support moment reduction, therefore delta-mI= A/16
and delta-mII= A/16 for bx=by. The moment reduction is limited to max. 20 %. This reduction
also works on switched off punching PUNC NO. With PUNC NO D 0.01 B 0.01 the moment
reduction can be switched off. With SELE this can be switched off for specific nodes.
d d-support node
Figure2.12: Designthicknessinthecentralnode
In addition a larger thickness is used during the bending design of the central column node. In
this case the thickness is increased from the column edge with 1:3. With the default of a plate
2-18 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
thickness in the record GEOM as well as at wall ends and wall corners this increase does not
occur. The increased thickness is printed in the case of ECHO REIN FULL per node.
2 1
1b 2
1,5d b
1b 2
1 1
2 2
≥2b
bildung2.11:Maßgebende Abschnitte des kritischenRundschnitt
Figure2.13: Determinantsectionsofthecriticalroundcut
Legend 1 Load area Aod
2 determinant sections of the critical round cut






 1 ≤ 2b



 6d−b
1

b
b ≤
1
3d
Thevalues6dand3daredependingondesigncode. ThevaluesusedherecountforGermany
and Austria- DIN EN 1992-1-1 Bild NA.6.12.1.
In Great Britain up to column size a/b smaller 4 no reduction is used, in all other European
countries the legs are limited to 1,5*d.
2.5.5 Special Features at Wall Ends
There are two methods to analyze the punching force at wallends and corners. Default is the
integration of the slab shear force along the critical perimeter (CTRL WINT 0). WITH ECHO
PUNCFULLthedistributionoftheslabshearforceisplottedqualitatively. Aswefoundoutthat
the result varies depending on the distance to the wall, BEMESS analyzes four distances and
takes the maximum punching force - for an ionfo checkable in WINGRAF after a BEMESS run
with ECHO PUNC 5.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-19BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
Alternatively the old method of SOFiSTiK Version 2014 can be used with CTRL WINT 1.5.
Thennottheslabshearforceisusedbutthesupportreactionsatthewallareintegratedalong
a specific length. This length was preset to 1.5*a1/2 in version 2014. With CTRL WINT 1.0
also a shorter integration length can be selected for wall ends (not acting at wall corners). In
this method the reaction forces are first changed to smeared line reactions and the integrated.
The old method caused problems on stiff supports due to the singular high point force at the
wall end. Often at the second suppurt node a (negative) tension occured. The new method
integratestheshearforceinadistancetothesingularityandgivesbetterresultsinmostcases.
Thepunchingatwallendsusesafixed β factoraccordingtothecode. Atendofwallstheside
length of the punching perimeter is set to s=a1/2 (with limitations according to codes). With
CTRL WEND this can be controlled:
With a positive input for CTRL WEND the side length of the design perimeter is set to
WEND*wallthickness. With a negative input for CTRL WEND an additional factor to the side
length according the code (a1/2) can be defined: s=(-WEND)·a1/2, default -1.0).
1b 2
b
1b 2
1
1 2
Figure2.14: Wallend,a1andb1seeinnercolumns
If two wall ends are direct side by side, u is limited to 0.6·u0 in order to prevent an overlap of
the round cuts.
The design moment is reduced at wall ends. An increase of the plate thickness in the central
node does not occur, however, because in the rule it is supported onto a masonry wall.
2.5.6 Special Features at Wall Corners
The punching at wall corners was improved according EN-1991-1-1 and is also valid for other
codes.
Atwallcornersthesidelengthofthepunchingperimeterissetto1.·d(dependingonthecode).
The wall width has no effect now! The analysis of the punching force used the same method
than at wall ends.
Legend 1 Load area Aod

1
= 1.5 · d
2
2-20 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
b
1 2
1 1
2
Figure2.15: Wallcorner
(a1/2 independent of b)
2.5.7 Punching at Foundations
For EN-1991-1-1 codes the critical perimeter distance is searched iteratively. Other codes
often use a distance 1.0·d . The distance to the slab boundary is not valued as critical as
for normal slabs (the critical distance to the boundary is taken to 1.2-1.8·d depending on the
slab thickness (6·d for normal slabs/openings). A higher boundary β value is then taken for a
relation u/u0 < 0.95 (0.80 for normal slabs).
ReductionofthesoilpressureaccordingEN-1991-1-1isallowedwith100%areaofthecritical
reduced design cut. PUNC LC_P reactivated to input a fixed loadcase for soil pressure reduc-
tion. Futhermore now at least 90 % of the maximum soil pressure is taken for the reduction,
also in case of lower minimum soil pressure, because usually the maximum punching force
corresponds with maximum soil pressure (is not clear in priory).
With ECHO PUNC 4 you can get the punchung force V-Ed without bedding reduction in the
WINGRAF plot.
2.5.8 Consideration of the Prestress during Punching Check
Depending on the codeprestress normal stresses are taken intoaccount for punching design,
but only the part of real defined slab tendons crossing the punching zone. Normal forces of a
normal 3D analysis without tendons are not taken into account!
The vertical component of tendons is considered for the analysis of VED in all design codes.
BEMESSsearchesforeachpunchingperimeterthetendonswhichcrossthis perimeter. Fora
horizontaldeviationofthetendontotheperimetergreaterthan60degreeatendonisnottaken
into account for this perimeter. Up to 40 degree the cosine is used, between 40 and 60 the
contributionisinterpolated. CreepandshrinkageareconsideredwithaconstantlossofCTRL
VPDC-defaultVPDC=0.12(=12%). WithECHOPUNCEXTRallusedtendonsarelistedwith
their single effect.
Instead of the automatic calculation of Vpd, Vpd can also be input manually for each punching
node with PUNC...VPD (positive = relieving effect). The input value is then taken constant for
SOFiSTiK2023 2-21BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
each punching perimeter.
2.5.9 Punching Check at a Three-Dimensional System
Inincreasingmeasurehigh-risebuildingsareanalysedaccordingtotheFiniteElementMethod
also for three-dimensional systems. The singular column points and wall end points are a
problem in the design especially for the shear design. The decisive punching points of column
connections and wall ends are identified automatically also at inserted slabs and checked.
Within a round cut the normal plate shear check can be omitted then. The bending moments
arereducedatthecolumns. Thedecisiveshearforceresultsfromthedifferenceofthecolumn
forces over and under the slab. Because these parts are not anymore understandable from
the column forces after a superposition with the partial safety factors, the punching force is
integrated about the shape functions at the punching node from the bordering plate elements.
The punching dimensions are extracted automatically from the column cross sections and the
wall thicknesses.
Figure2.16: Criticalpunchingandshearreinforcementperimeters
Inthesamemannerapunchingcheckisperformedforcolumnsandwallendsatelasticbedded
foundation plates with deduction of the minimum soil pressure.
In the illustration the automatically determined critical punching round cuts are plotted in red.
Some punching points require multiple shear reinforcement perimeters. Here this is the case
particularly in the foundation slab. The in each case reduced round cut is recognizable at the
wall ends.
The following Figure 2.17 shows how BEMESS calculates the punching force:
2-22 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
Figure2.17: Connectingforcestocalculatethepunchingforceatcolumns
Procedure: at the column node in the slab here 4 quad elements attach to the node. The
connecting forces of these 4 quad elements are summed up and give the punching force.
These connecting forces are much more precise that the quad shear forces that could be
integrated in a perimeter around the column. Furthermore this method also works in case the
column forces of a higher level are only applied as single loads. A problem is that usually only
the MAXIMA superposed loadcases are used - see problemm of Figure 2.19
A differnce of the column force above and below the slab is not used in BEMESS as the Max-
Min column forces are separate results and sometimes not even analyzed.
Punching is only performed on horizontal slabs but not at vertical walls!
2.5.10 V-Ed analysis out of MAXIMA superposition loadcases
InthedesignofanormalslaborshellstructureBEMESSonlygetstheMAXIMAsuperposition
loadcases. The superposed support reactions don’t help because in a 3D system they do not
give an information at the punching node. Lets now study an example, showing a slab on a
column with dead load and wind. In a manual calculation you would check the combination
γ∗g+γ∗ and design punching with β∗V−Ed=512kN:
γ∗g γ∗ γ∗g+γ∗
200kN 200 70 −70 270 130
V−Ed=400kN
M=60kNm
β=1.28
β∗V−Ed=512kN
Figure2.18: Slabonacolumnwithdeadloadandwind
But the combination loadcase γ∗g+ γ∗ does not exist as a single loadcase in a normal
SOFiSTiK2023 2-23BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
analysis. There you only have the single loadcases and the MAXIMA superposition quad
forces, e.g. min-mxx. From this BEMESS must extract a punching force and gets:
γ∗g γ∗ MAXMA−mn−m
200kN 200 70 −70 270 200
V−Ed=470kN
M=30kNm
β=1.08
β∗V−Ed=508kN
Figure2.19: Punchingforce,extractedfromMAXIMAquadsuperpositionforces
The force V-Ed= 470 kN does not really exist but the design controlling value β∗V − Ed =
508kN is quite close to the manual value.
Conclusion: thesuperposedMAXIMAquadforcescancontainresultsfromactionsthatcannot
occur in parallel (left of the column force with wind, right of the column force without wind), but
the design controlling value β∗V−Ed=508kN is OK.
Remark: by default BEMESS uses a minimum β of 1.15. So BEMESS would be on the save
side here. To use the value β =1.08 you must input CTRL BETA -2.
2.5.11 Other Design Codes
Special features of EN-1992
Punchingdesignisdonewiththecriticalperimeterat2.0*d. Anadditionalcheckatthecolumn
face is added depending on the country code.
Special features of the BS EN 1992-1-1:2004
- Minimum value for vrdc according to 6.4.4(1) (6.47) for punching
- In punching design the effective steel stress value fyd_ef is taken into account.
- According to 6.4.5(3) (6.53) a maximum punching resistance is taken into account.
Special feartures OENORM B 4700
The original EC2 equation with 40·ro1 is used for VRdc for punching and not the equation (44)
of B 4700, because the span l in the case of FE plates is in general unknown. VRds is limited
to 1.4·VRdc. The punching reinforcement is approximately twice so large as with the original
EC2 due to the effective coefficient ks!
Special features according to American Standard ACI
Punching occurs with marking (without precise particularization) of possible necessary shear
armsaccordingtoACI318-1422.6.4and22.6.5. Likefortheshearcheckastrengthreduction
factor of 0.75 is used also here.
In a first step v < vc with vc according table 22.6.5.2 ist checked.
If v < vc no shear reinforcement is necessary.
2-24 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
Otherwise a smaller vc according table 22.6.6.1 is used to design a shear reinforcement.
Special features French Design Code BAEL 91 Revision 99 - difference to EC2
Punching form: rectangle around the column
Check of the shear stress in distance d/2
If not possible without shear reinforcement, then a warning is printed with reference to manual
determination of punching reinforcement.
Special features Italian Design Code D.M.9 genniao 1996 - difference to EC2
Punching is only checked according to EC2. If not possible without shear reinforcement, then
a warning is printed with reference to manual determination of punching reinforcement.
Special features of the Russian SNiP SP 63.13330.2012
AccordingSP63.13330.2012itisonlycheckedifthepunchingdesignisfulfilledwithoutshear
reinforcement. Otherwise the node is marked with an error.
Special features of the Swedish BBK 04
Punching is checked at a perimeter 0.5·d. The punching eccentricity factor η is set to 1/1.15
for inner supports, 1/1.40 for boundary supports and 1/1.5 for edge supports, according to
common EC2 regulations. A design with punching shear reinforcement is not allowed in BBK
04. Also a check for the for column heads is not done.
Special features of the Australian AS 5100 and AS 3600
The punching design according to AS 3600 does not allow an increase of the shear capacity
withlongitudinalreinforcementorshearreinforcement. Thus,thepunchingdesignisperformed
according to the new Eurocode EC 2 1992-1-1:2004(E). With the printed punching force V-ED
a manual check according to AS 3600 9.2 can be added easily.
Special features of the Danish DS 411
Punching in designed without influence of longitudinal reinforcement. The shear stress τ Sd =
VSd//h is limited:
τ Sd < 0.12 * μ* fcd : punching check OK.
τ Sd < 2 * 0.12 * μ* fcd : shear reinforcement required
τ Sd > 2 * 0.12 * μ* fcd : punching failed
Special features Swiss Code SIA 262:2013
In BEMESS two LoA (level-of-appoximation) are implemented:
• LoA I (first step)
• LoA III (third step)
The punching shear strength for member without shear reinforcement is calculated acc. SIA
262:2013, 4.3.6.3.1, Eq.(57):
V Rd,c =k r ·τ cd·d · (2.1)
SOFiSTiK2023 2-25BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
The control perimeter  is calculated according to SIA 262:2013, Fig.(21) and Fig.(22):
2a
b2 s2
62
4/ 624/,d0
,
0d 
=2·+2·b+d ·π =(s+d )·π
 
Figure2.20: Controlperimeter
The effect of the shear forces at the corners of large supported areas is implemented as well.
=8·1.5d +d ·π
 
96,0
0,23

d /2 d·5.1

0,69
1.5·d

Figure2.21: Reducedcontrolperimeter
BEMESS takes into account the reduced basic control perimeter ( 1,red) when  > 12·d as
shown in Fig. 2.21.
Hint
Columns: pleasenotethatonlyrectangularandtubesectionsarecalculatedcorrectly. T
and L cross-sections aren’t supported.
BEMESS can also reduce the control perimeter in case of punching near the edge of plate
(refer to SIA 262:2013 Fig.(21-d)), the program checks the edges and openings around the
2-26 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
punching point. For walls the control perimeter can be calculated as shown in Fig. 2.22.
1,1
1.5·d
 5,0
32,1 
d·5.1
b
1,1 1,23
1.5·d 1.5·d
 
d d
 
=2·1.5·d +b+ ·π =2·1.5·d + ·π
 
2 4
Figure2.22: Reducedcontrolperimeter
According to SIA 262:2013 the control perimeter can be reduced by multiplying the length of
basic control perimeter by the coefficient of eccentricity k e. BEMESS takes the minimal value
of the two definitions as defined in the norm (on the safety side):
 
k =0.9 ƒor nner comns
e
 
 k e =0.70 ƒor edge comns 1 
k e =mn  ; e   (2.2)
 k e =0.65 ƒor corner comns 1+ 
 b 
k =0.75 ƒor corners oƒ s
e
The value of k g (DMAX) is set to 32 mm, for high strength and lightweight concrete, the ag-
gregate particles may break, resulting in reduced aggregate interlock. In that case, the value
k g =0 (DMAX=0). Value k c is set to 0.55, according to SIA 262:2013 (4.2.1.7).
The parameter k r is calculated by using SIA 262:2013, Eq.(58):
1
k r = (2.3)
0.45+0.18·ψ·d·k
g
where for LoA I (refer to SIA 262:2013, Eq.(59)):
r ƒ
s sd
ψ=1.5· · (2.4)
d E
s
and for LoA III:
3
r ƒ (cid:18)m (cid:19)
s sd sd 2
ψ=1.2· · · (2.5)
d E m
s Rd
SOFiSTiK2023 2-27BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
For punching in a first step the perimeter is reduced. Then approximation step 1 according
4.3.6.4.2 with m sd/m Rd =1 is tried. The distances r s and r sy in radial direction are extracted
from the real bending moment line. If this step 1 fails, in approximation step 3 the bending
moments in the supporting strip are extracted from the Finite Element results according to SIA
262:2013, 4.3.6.4.8. Then BEMESS tries to increase the longitudinal reinforcement (up to
PUNC RO_V) to increase the bending capacity m sd and reduce the slab rotation ψ.
Incasethisisnotpossible,thelongitudinalreinforcementissettoPUNC RO_Mandthenecessary
punching shear reinforcement is calculated according SIA 262:2013, 4.3.6.5).
The contribution of the shear reinforcement is calculated as
V d,s =V d−V Rd,c (2.6)
V Rd,s has to satisfy (SIA 262:2013, 4.3.6.4.5.4, Eq.(66))
V d,s ≥0.5·V d (2.7)
The shear reinforcement is calculated as in (SIA 262:2013, 4.3.6.5.4, Eq.(67)):
V
(cid:88) d,s
A s·snβ= (2.8)
k ·σ
e cd
Hint
Please note that in BEMESS, β=90◦ →snβ=1.0
σ cd is calculated according to SIA 262:2013, 4.3.6.5.4, Eq.(68).
The stress in the punching shear reinforcement is calculated using the maximum diameter of
table 20 (SIA 262:2013, 5.5.3.12). If you want to use a smaller diameter you can manually
adjust the reinforcement with a higher steel stress.
ThemaximumpunchingresistanceischeckedaccordingSIA 262:2013, 4.3.6.5.7andlongi-
tudinal reinforcement increased if necessary:
V Rd,c,m =2·k r ·τ cd·d ·≤3.5·τ cd·d · (2.9)
The collapse check according SIA 262:2013, 4.3.6.7.1 is done with k β = 0.37 but without
additionalcondition 1.7·τ cd·d nt· nt asthenecessarydimensionsarenotknown. Thismust
be checked separately.
Foundation/Footing: Thedesignconceptforthepunchingshearoffootingscanbecalculated
viaBEMESSaswell. TheappliedshearforceV d isreducedbytheupwardsoilpressureinside
the critical perimeter. The distances r s and r sy in radial direction are extracted from the real
bending moment line, if BEMESS can not find m d =0 then the value of r s =3·d is used.
2.6 Linear Stress Determination
Linearstressesof thesingleloadcasesorof thesingleloadcasesfrom superposition maybe
2-28 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|BEMESS
printed directly without the program BEMESS with the program WinGRAF at cuts or isolines.
The option of the stress determination CTRL STRE in BEMESS is used for the search of
extremestressesfromaseriesofloadcases. InthiscaseBEMESSselectsitselfthemaximum
stress from the indicated load cases for each element. Then a plot of this extreme stresses
shows in general results of different load cases like a moment envelope.
Theanalysisofstressrangeonthesurfaceisdoneevery3degreesimilartotheCapraMaury
technique. The maximum stress range is printed with the angle where it was found. If a
permante loadcase is defined (LC PERm) the stress in this direction is printed as well.
1
2
3
4
Figure2.23: Analysisofstressrangeonthesurfaceevery3degree(rosettetechnique)
The normal stresses are determined according to the formula:
N M
σ = ±
A W
This is done separately for the two sides of the plate or the shell for σ , σ y and σ y. These
can be used for the calculation of the principal stresses σ  and σ  and the angle α.
The shear stress at the plate centre or shell centre is calculated according to the formula:
V
τ = 1.5 ·
A
ThedesignshearforceVisthemaximumshearforcedeterminedatthedesignpointbymeans
of geometric addition of the shear forces VX and VY:
V = (V2 + V2)1/2
 y
Also van mise stresses on top, on bottom and as maximum values are calculated. To get the
maximum van Mise stress also inside an element, the elements are cut into 10 layers for the
sigv analysis.
ThestressdeterminationwithBEMESSmustnotbeusedafteramaterialnon-linearcalculation
with ASE, because the formula σ = N/A M/W is not valid anymore for the structure thickness
of a non-linear stress distribution! Non-linear stresses after a non-linear ASE calculation e.g.
a1_introduction_example.dat can be requested with the program WING in a separate way.
2.7 Disk structures
For disk structures the input DIRE UPP, GEOM HA,DHA and PARA DU,ASU,ASU2 count for
onesideofthedisc,ontheothersidethesamevaluesareused. IntheoutputyougetanASU
SOFiSTiK2023 2-29BEMESS|TheoreticalPrinciples
and an ASL, both must be placed. In WINGRAF only ASU is served, on the other side the
same reinforcement must be placed.
2.8 Volume elements
With RI3D also BRIC elements can be designed - see RI3D and example bric_design.dat
2-30 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3 Input Description
3.1 Input Language
TheprogramBEMESSusestheCADINPinputlanguage,seegeneralmanualSOFiSTiK:’FEA
/ STRUCTURAL Installation and Basics’. Three categories of units are distinguished:
mm Fixed unit. Input is always required in the specified unit.
[mm] Explicit unit. Input defaults to the specified unit. Alternatively, an explicit as-
signment of a related unit is possible (eg. 2.5[m] ).
[mm] Implicit unit. Implicit units are categorised semantically and denoted by a cor-
1011
responding identity number (shown in green). Valid categories referring to the
unit ”length” are, for example, geodetic elevation, section length and thickness.
Thedefaultunitforeachcategoryisdefinedbythecurrentlyactive(designcode
specific) unit set. This input default can be overridden as described above. The
specified unit in square brackets corresponds to the default for unit set 5 (Eu-
rocodes, NORM UNIT 5).
3.2 Input Records
The following records are defined:
Record Items
CTRL TYPE RMOD SYST WALL AUGM THIC
TENS LCR PFAI RO_V COTT FACH
WARN LCRI VF70 SNIP WINT WEND REDN
RADP BUBB REDM VPDC SIGZ LCRP WTEN
CRAC MUEZ XMIN DDES STAN WK BETA BOND
BET1 BET2 K1 DDEB WKB
MREI FFCT KC K ROBU PARA
SHFT TYPE
NSTR SIGS SIGT CHKC CHKR FATC LS_U LS_L
LS_V LS_P FACU FACL FACV FACP SIGP
LOCP
MAT CONC STEE K BETZ N MINC MSTA
T011 T02 T03 AM3 FC FY TU0
TUGR TRD SC1 SC2 SS1 SS2
GEOM H HA DHA HB DHB DDHA DDHB
HPRE
DIRE UPP LOW TYPE X Y Z
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-1BEMESS|InputDescription
Record Items
THRE ABEX ABMI ABIN BEEX BEMI BEIN
DI3D OAL OAF X Y Z
LAY POS Z DIRE D AS ASMA BS
WK SS
PARA NOG NOEL DU DU DU3 DL DL2
DL3 WKU WKU2 WKU3 WKL WKL2 WKL3
SSU SSU2 SSU3 SSL SSL2 SSL3 ASU
ASU2 ASU3 ASL ASL2 ASL3 BSU BSU2
BSU3 BSL BSL2 BSL3 TYPE
PUNC TYPE X Y Z D B HEAD
DHEA RO_V MREI P LC_P REIN L
VPD RO_M RO_L MMOM HRED BETA
LC NO PERC FACT
GRP NO ENVA ENVB WKU WKL SIGU SIGL
ELEM FROM TO DELT WKA WKB
SIGA SIGB
NODE FROM TO DELT GROU WKA
WKB SIGA SIGB
SELE NO TYPE
S NO NO1 MX MY MXY VX VY
NX NY NXY
EXPO OPT TO PASS
ECHO OPT VAL
Theinputsequenceoftheinputrecordsisarbitrary. However,ENDmustalwaysbethelastin-
putrecord. EachELEMorNODErecordcausesadesignwiththealreadydefinedparameters
(possible as the default values). An input of GEO or DIRE or THRE after ELEM/NODE refers
thus always to the next design specifications.
The records HEAD, END and PAGE are described in the general manual SOFiSTiK: ’FEA /
STRUCTURAL Installation and Basics’.
A reasonable analysis is possible even without data. The default values are activated in each
case.
3-2 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.3 NORM – Default Design Code
NORM
Item Description Unit Default
DC Design code family LT EN
EN Eurocodes
DIN German Standard
OEN Austrian Standard
SIA Swiss Standard
AS Standard
BS British Standard
IS Indian Standard
US US Standards (ACI etc.)
GB Chinese Building Codes
NF French Standard
UNI Italian Standard
UNE Spanish Standard
SS Swedish Standard
DS Danish Standard
NS Norwegian Standard
SP Russian Standard
NZS New Zealand Standard
SFS Finnish Standard
NEN Netherlands Standard
NBN Belgian Standard
NBR Brazilian Standard
ZA South African Standard
NDC Designation of a specific design code Lt16 -
COUN Country code for boxed values within EN − *
CAT Category or Class Lt4 -/!
LON Geographic longitude ◦ 0
LAT Geographic latitude ◦ 45
G Gravity acceleration m/sec2 *
ALT Altitude above sea level m 0.0
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-3BEMESS|InputDescription
Item Description Unit Default
WIND Wind zone Lt4 *
SNOW Snow zone Lt4 *
SEIS Seismic zone Lt4 *
WCAT Terrain category for wind Lt4 *
UNIT Selection of a set of units − *
LANG Selection of a output language default − *
Many defaults for materials, superposition and design are selected according to the selected
designcodeandanoptionalcountrycodeandalltheotherdataprovidedwiththisrecord. Itis
therefore requested to specify this data with the beginning of the project.
A redefinition of the design code after the definition of actions or load cases have been
definedortheeditingoftheINI-Filetoinclude”missing”materialsdoesnotcomplywith
the provisions of SOFiSTiK for a proper use of the software.
ItispossibletoredefinethedesigncodeNORMtemporarilyforthedesign(eg. concrete/steel)
if the parameters of the actions remain the same. As this might have some special risque, the
user should use this option thoroughly.
Althoughtherearestillexplicitcodefragmentsinthesoftwareunavoidable,manyofthedefaults
arespecifiedinsocalledINI-FileslocatedintheSOFiSTiKdirectory. Thenameofthematching
INI-file is derived from the given data as DC_NDC.INI.
Some properties (e.g. Eurocode) are dependant on national variants (boxed values). Corre-
sponding INI-files to EN 1992-2004 and EN 1993-2005 and the country code may be used to
selectthosevalues,asfaraswehavegotnoticeofthem. Thecountrycodeforexampleisvalid
for deviations in Hong Kong to the British Standard 8110, 5400, 5950 or similar. Examples for
the country code:
00 General EN
HK / 852 Hong Kong
The ”boxed values” can be modified manually with the record TVAR.
Some codes require or allow the selection of a category or class. This can then be specified
with CAT. The possible items are given in the INI-File. For evaluations with historic design
codes not available with an INI-file, the definition of CAT USER allows to specify any name of
the design code.
Inthecaseofasubsequentmodificationoftheseclassesorcategoriestheinputwhich
depends on the design code has to be checked and adapted if necessary.
The extend to which the specified latitude, altitude, wind/snow or earthquake zone definitions
areaccountedforisdescribedintheprogrammanualsofthemodulesusingthosevalues. The
user should never assume that all regulations of the design codes are automatically fulfilled
when selecting such a value. The possible items and defaults are given in the matching INI-
3-4 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
File. The resultant values which result from the altitude or the wind/snow/earthquake zones
have to be checked in the corresponding programs in the case of a subsequent modification.
E.g. for some design codes the combination coefficients of the snow depend on the altitude.
Inthe caseof amodification ofthealtitude combinationcoefficients haveto beadaptedby the
user if necessary.
If the user wants to suppress such a value completely he may specify it with ”NONE”. The
load case of self weight is always accounted for following the definitions of the design codes,
an explicit definition of G has to be done only in those cases where the true local value should
be applied.
The item UNIT or d LANG will be processed only in AQUA or TEMPLATE. With a definition of
UNIT a set of units will be selected globally for all input and output data in all other modules.
The default is specified in the INI-file. Definitions with record PAGE will be active only within
the current module.
The following design codes are available as INI-Files and/or special program code has been
created to cope with special regulations. The marks A and B indicate if this code has been
implementedinAQBandBEMESS.Formoredetailedinformation,especiallywhichprovisions
of the codes have been implemented, please check the manuals and the HTM-files of the
designprograms. Inmanycasesitispossibletoaddsomeclauseswithinshorttimewithinthe
program or with CADINP.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-5BEMESS|InputDescription
EN - Eurocodes
Description UNIT Design
EN 199X-200X Eurocode Building Construction 5 A,B
EN 1992-1-1 Design of concrete structures
EN 1993-1-1 Design of steel structures
EN 1994-1-1 Design of composite steel and
concrete structures
including actions and combinations according
to:
EN 1990
EN 1991-1-x
including materials according to:
EN 1995-1-1 Timber
EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
COUN country code Israel for load trains only
IL/972
EN 199X-200X-BRIDGE Eurocode Bridge Construction 5 A,B
EN 1992-2 Design of concrete structures
EN 1993-2 Design of steel structures
EN 1994-2 Design of composite steel and con-
crete structures
including actions and loads according to:
EN 1990
EN 1991-2
including materials according to:
EN 1995-2 Timber
EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B/C/D road bridges / footbridges / rail-
road bridges
with actions and design values (boxed
values) for bridges
COUN country code Israel for load trains only
IL/972
3-6 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
DIN - Deutsche Norm
Description UNIT Design
DIN EN199X-200X Nationale Anwendungsdokumente DIN 5 A,B
Hochbau
DIN EN 1992-1-1/NA:2013 Stahlbetontrag-
werke
DIN EN 1993-1-1/NA:2018 Stahlbauten
DIN EN 1994-1-1/NA:2010 Verbundtragw-
erke
einschließlich Einwirkungen, Kombinatio-
nen nach:
DIN EN 1990/NA:2012
DIN EN 1991-1-x/NA:201x
einschließlich Materialien nach:
DIN EN 1995-1-1/NA:2013 Holz
DIN EN 1996-1-1/NA:2019 Mauerwerk
DIN EN 1999-1-1/NA:2007 Aluminium
DIN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE Nationale Anwendungsdokumente DIN 5 A,B
Brückenbau
DIN EN 1992-2/NA:2013 Stahlbetontragw-
erke
DIN EN 1993-2/NA:2014 Stahlbauten
DIN EN 1994-2/NA:2010 Verbundtragwerke
einschließlich Einwirkungen, Lasten nach:
DIN EN 1990/NA:2012
DIN EN 1991-2/NA:2012
einschließlich Materialien nach:
DIN EN 1995-2/NA:2011 Holz
DIN EN 1996-1-1/NA:2019 Mauerwerk
DIN EN 1999-1-1/NA:2007 Aluminium
CAT B/C/D Straßenbrücken / Fußgänger-
brücken / Eisenbahnbrücken
mit Einwirkungen und Bemes-
sungswerte für Brücken (boxed
values)
DIN 1045-2008 DIN 1045-1 (2008) 0 A,B
CAT -/A/B/C/D/E/F (Tab. 18)
Klassifizierung von Nachweisbedin-
gungen
DIN FB102-2009 DIN Fachbericht 102 (2009) 0 A,B
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-7BEMESS|InputDescription
Description UNIT Design
CAT A/B/C/D/E (Tab. 4.118) Klassi-
fizierungvonNachweisbedingungen,
keineVoreinstellungvonKombinatio-
nen
DIN FB103-2009 DIN Fachbericht 103 (2009) 2 A
DIN FB104-2009 DIN Fachbericht 104 (2009) 0 A
DIN 18800 Stahlbau (Nov. 2008) 2 A
CAT A voreingestellte Überlagerung DIN
18800
CAT B voreingestellte Überlagerung DIN
1055-100
DIN 1052-2008 Holzbau (2008) 0 A
CAT 1/2/3 Nutzungsklassen
DIN 1045-1 DIN 1045-1 (2001) 0 A,B
CAT -/A/B/C/D/E/F (Tab. 18) Klassi-
fizierung von Nachweisbedingun-
gen
DIN FB102-2003 DIN Fachbericht 102 (2003) 0 A,B
CAT A/B/C/D/E (Tab. 4.118) Klassi-
fizierung von Nachweisbedingun-
gen
DIN 1045 Alte Norm (1988) 0 A,B
DAfStb hochfest.Beton (1995) A
DIN 4227 Alte Spannbetonnorm + Anhang A1 (1995) 0 A
DIN FB103-2003 DIN Fachbericht 103 (2003) 2 A
DIN FB104-2003 DIN Fachbericht 104 (2003) 0 A
CAT -/A/B/C/D/E/F (Tab. 4.118 des FB
102), Klassifizierung von Nachweis-
bedingungen
DIN 18800-1990 Stahlbau (1990) 2 A
DIN 1052-1988 Holzbau (1988) 0 A
3-8 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
OEN - Österreichische Norm
Description UNIT Design
OEN EN199X-200X Nationale Anwendungsdokumente OEN 5 A,B
Hochbau
OEN EN 1992-1-1/NA:2011 Stahlbeton-
tragwerke
OEN EN 1993-1-1/NA:2007 Stahlbauten
OEN EN 1994-1-1 Verbundtragwerke
einschließlich Einwirkungen, Kombinatio-
nen nach:
OEN EN 1990/NA:2004
OEN EN 1991-1-x/NA:201x
einschließlich Materialien nach:
OEN EN 1995-1-1 Holz
OEN EN 1996-1-1 Mauerwerk
OEN EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
OEN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE Nationale Anwendungsdokumente OEN 5 A,B
Brückenbau
OEN EN 1992-2/NA:2004 Stahlbetontrag-
werke
OEN EN 1993-2/NA:2014 Stahlbauten
OEN EN 1994-2 Verbundtragwerke
einschließlich Einwirkungen, Lasten nach:
OEN EN 1990/NA:2012
OEN EN 1991-2/NA:2011
einschließlich Materialien nach:
OEN EN 1995-2 Holz
OEN EN 1996-1-1 Mauerwerk
OEN EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B/C/D Straßenbrücken /
Fußgängerbrücken / Eisenbahn-
brücken
mit Einwirkungen und Bemes-
sungswerte für Brücken (boxed
values)
OEN 4700 Stahlbeton OENORM B 4700 (2001) 0 A,B
OEN 4750 Spannbeton OENORM B 4750 (2000) 0 A
OEN 4300 Stahl OENORM B 4300 (1994) 0 A
For the old design codes OEN 4200, OEN 4250, OEN 4253 no INI files exist. The program
AQB is so programmed that the appropriate design is done with input of the design code. As
SOFiSTiK2023 3-9BEMESS|InputDescription
materials BOE is input for concrete and BSOE for steel.
SIA - Schweizer Norm
Description UNIT Design
SIA 26X Schweizer Normen 0 A,B
SIA 262 Betonbauten (2013)
SIA 263 Stahlbau (2013)
SIA 264 Stahl-Beton-Verbundbau
einschließlich Einwirkungen, Kombinationen nach:
SIA 260 Grundlagen der Projektierung
SIA 261 Einwirkungen auf Tragwerke
einschließlich Materialien nach:
SIA 265 Holzbau mit Serviceklassen 1,2,3 - Angabe beim Holz-
material
BS - British Standard
Description UNIT Design
BS EN199X-200X National Annexes BS building construction 6 A,B
BS EN 1992-1-1/NA:2005 Design of con-
crete structures
BS EN 1993-1-1/NA:2008 Design of steel
structures
BS EN 1994-1-1/NA:2008 Design of com-
posite steel and concrete structures
including actions and combinations accord-
ing to:
BS EN 1990/NA:2009
BS EN 1991-1-x/NA:200x
including materials according to:
BS EN 1995-1-1 Timber
BS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
BS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
BS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE National Annexes BS bridge construction 6 A,B
BS EN 1992-2/NA:2007 Design of concrete
structures
BS EN 1993-2/NA:2012 Design of steel
structures
BSEN1994-2/NA:2007Designofcomposite
steel and concrete structures
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-10 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Description UNIT Design
including actions and loads according to:
BS EN 1990/NA:2009
BS EN 1991-2/NA:2008
including materials according to:
BS EN 1995-2 Timber
BS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
BS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B/C/Droadbridges/footbridges/rail-
road bridges
withactionsanddesignvalues(boxed
values) for bridges
BS 8110 British Standard Concrete (1997) 6 A,B
COUN country code Hong Kong
HK/852
BS 5400 British Standard Concrete Bridge (1990) 6 A
CAT 0 without Prestress
CAT 1/2/3 Prestress for Class 1/2/3
COUN country code Hong Kong
HK/852
COUN country code Israel
IL/972
BS 5950 British Standard Steelwork (2001) 6 A
COUN country code Hong Kong
HK/852
US - American Standards and Unified Building Code
Description UNIT Design
US ACI-318-14 American Standard ACI / UBC (2014) 9 A,B
US ACI-318-08 American Standard ACI / UBC (2008) 9 A
US AASHTO-2014 American Highway (2014) 8 A
US AASHTO-2010 American Highway (2010) 8 A
US AASHTO-2004 American Highway (2005) 8 A
US AISC-2005 American Standard AISC (Steel) 2005 9 A
SOFiSTiK2023 3-11BEMESS|InputDescription
SP - Russian Standard
Description UNIT Design
SP 63-13330 SP 63.13330.20112 (Concrete) 0 A,B
SP 16-13330 SP 16.13330.2011 (Steel) 2 A
IS - Indian Standard
Description UNIT Design
IS 456 Indian Standard (2000) (Concrete) 6 A
IS IRC112 Indian Roads Congress: Code of Practice for Concrete Road 6 A
Bridges (2011)
AS - Australian Standard
Description UNIT Design
AS BUILDING AS for building construction 6
for concrete and steel stuctures
without member design, default to superpositions
AS 3600 Concrete Structures (2009) 6 A,B
AS 4100 Structural Steel (1998) 6 A
AS 5100 Bridge Design (2004) 6 A
UNE - Instrucciones Espaniola
Description UNIT Design
UNE EHE Instrucion de hormign estructural 0 A,B
Nivel de control de ejecucin:
EHE Normal
EHE_INTENSIO Intensio
EHE_REDUCIDO Reducido
UNI - Decreto Ministeriale Italiane
Description UNIT Design
UNI DM-2018 Decreto Ministeriale 2018: Norme Tecniche per le 5 A,B
Costruzioni
CAT A Costruzioni Civili
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-12 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Description UNIT Design
CAT B Ponti Stradali
CAT C Ferroviari
NF - AFNOR Association Francaise de Normalisation
Description UNIT Design
NF EN199X-200X AnnexesNationalesNFconstructiondebâti- 5 A,B
ments
NF EN 1992-1-1/NA:2013 Calcul des struc-
tures en béton
NF EN 1993-1-1/NA:2018 Calcul des struc-
tures en arcier
NF EN 1994-1-1/NA:2010 Calcul des struc-
tures mixtes acier-béton
including actions and combinations accord-
ing to:
NF EN 1990/NA:2004
NF EN 1991-1-x/NA:200x
including materials according to:
NF EN 1995-1-1 Bois
NF EN 1996-1-1 Maçonnerie
NF EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
NF EN199X-200X-BRIDGE Annexes Nationales NF construction de 5 A,B
ponts
NF EN 1992-2/NA:2007 Calcul des struc-
tures en béton
NF EN 1993-2/NA:2007 Calcul des struc-
tures en arcier
NF EN 1994-2/NA:2007 Calcul des struc-
tures mixtes acier-béton
including actions and loads according to:
NF EN 1990-A1/NA:2007
NF EN 1991-2/NA:2007
including materials according to:
NF EN 1995-2 Bois
NF EN 1996-1-1 Maçonnerie
NF EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B/C/D ponts routiers / passerelles /
ponts ferroviaires
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-13BEMESS|InputDescription
Description UNIT Design
withactionsanddesignvalues(boxed
values) for bridges
NF BAEL Règles techniques de conception et de cal- 0 A,B
cul des ouvrages et constructions en béton
armé suivant la méthode des états limites.
BAEL/BPEL 91 revises 99
CAT B bâtiments
CAT P ponts-routes
SS - Swedish Standard
Description UNIT Design
SS EN199X-200X National Annexes SS building construction 5 A,B
according to Boverkets författningssamling -
BFS 2019:1 EKS 11
SS EN 1992-1-1/EKS 11:2019 Design of
concrete structures
SS EN 1993-1-1/EKS 11:2019 Design of
steel structures
SS EN 1994-1-1/EKS 11:2019 Design of
composite steel and concrete structures
including actions and combinations accord-
ing to:
SS EN 1990/EKS 11:2019
SS EN 1991-1-x/EKS 11:2019
including materials according to:
SS EN 1995-1-1 Timber
SS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
SS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT A1 byggnader & säkerhetsklass 1
CAT A2 Byggnader & säkerhetsklass 2
CAT A3 Byggnader & säkerhetsklass 3
SS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE National Annexes SS bridge construction 5 A,B
according to Transportstyrelsens förfat-
tningssamling - TSFS 2018:57
SSEN1992-2/TSFS2018:57Designofcon-
crete structures
SSEN1993-2/TSFS2018:57Designofsteel
structures
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-14 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Description UNIT Design
SS EN 1994-2/TSFS 2018:57 Design of
composite steel and concrete structures
including actions and loads according to:
SS EN 1990/NA:2009
SS EN 1991-2/NA:2008
including materials according to:
SS EN 1995-2 Timber
SS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
SS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B1 Vägbroar & säkerhetsklass 1
CAT B2 Vägbroar & säkerhetsklass 2
CAT B3 Vägbroar & säkerhetsklass 3
CAT B4 Vägbroar & säkerhetsklass 4
CAT C1 Gangbroar & säkerhetsklass 1
CAT C2 Gangbroar & säkerhetsklass 2
CAT C3 Gangbroar & säkerhetsklass 3
CAT C4 Gangbroar & säkerhetsklass 4
CAT D1 Järnvägsbroar & säkerhetsklass 1
CAT D2 Järnvägsbroar & säkerhetsklass 2
CAT D3 Järnvägsbroar & säkerhetsklass 3
CAT D4 Järnvägsbroar & säkerhetsklass 4
with actions and design values
(boxed values) for bridges
DS - Danish Standard
Description UNIT Design
DS EN199X-200X National Annexes DS building construction 5 A,B
DS EN 1992-1-1/NA:2013 Design of con-
crete structures
DS EN 1993-1-1/NA:2007 Design of steel
structures
DS EN 1994-1-1/NA:2007 Design of com-
posite steel and concrete structures
including actions and combinations accord-
ing to:
DS EN 1990/NA:2007
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-15BEMESS|InputDescription
Description UNIT Design
DS EN 1991-1-x/NA:200x
including materials according to:
DS EN 1995-1-1 Timber
DS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
DS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT LE low safety & extended control
CAT NE normal safety & extended control
CAT HE high safety & extended control
CAT LN low safety & normal control
CAT NN normalsafety&normalcontrol(de-
fault)
CAT HN high safety & normal control
CAT LR low safety & reduced control
CAT NR normal safety & reduced control
CAT HR high safety & reduced control
safety according to DS EN 1990/NA:2007
control according to DS EN 1992-1-
1/NA:2007 and DS EN 1993-1-1/NA:2007
inspection level
DS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE National Annexes DS bridge construction 5 A,B
DS EN 1992-2/NA:2015 Design of concrete
structures
DS EN 1993-2/NA:2015 Design of steel
structures
DS EN 1994-2/NA:2005 Design of compos-
ite steel and concrete structures
including actions and combinations accord-
ing to:
DS EN 1990/A1/NA:2017
DS EN 1991-2/NA:2017
including materials according to:
DS EN 1995-1-1 Timber
DS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
DS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
for road bridges:
CAT BNEnormal safety & extended control
CAT BHEhigh safety & extended control
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-16 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Description UNIT Design
CAT BNNnormal safety & normal control
(default)
CAT BHNhigh safety & normal control
for footbridges:
CAT CNEnormal safety & extended control
CAT CHEhigh safety & extended control
CAT CNNnormal safety & normal control
CAT CHNhigh safety & normal control
for railroad bridges:
CAT DNEnormal safety & extended control
CAT DHEhigh safety & extended control
CAT DNNnormal safety & normal control
CAT DHNhigh safety & normal control
safety according to DS EN 1990/NA:2007
control according to DS EN 1992-2/NA:2015
and DS EN 1993-2/NA:2015 inspection level
NS - Norsk Standard
Description UNIT Design
NS EN199X-200X National Annexes NS building construction 5 A,B
NS EN 1992-1-1/NA:2008 Design of con-
crete structures
NS EN 1993-1-1/NA:2008 Design of steel
structures
NS EN 1994-1-1/NA:2009 Design of com-
posite steel and concrete structures
including actions and combinations accord-
ing to:
NS EN 1990/NA:2010
NS EN 1991-1-x/NA:200x
including materials according to:
NS EN 1995-1-1 Timber
NS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
NS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT A1 Bygninger & palitelighetsklasse 1
CAT A2 Bygninger & palitelighetsklasse 2
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-17BEMESS|InputDescription
Description UNIT Design
CAT A3 Bygninger & palitelighetsklasse 3
CAT A4 Bygninger & palitelighetsklasse 4
NS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE National Annexes NS bridge construction 5 A,B
NS EN 1992-2/NA:2010 Design of concrete
structures
NS EN 1993-2/NA:2009 Design of steel
structures
NS EN 1994-2/NA:2009 Design of compos-
ite steel and concrete structures
including actions and loads according to:
NS EN 1990/NA:2010
NS EN 1991-2/NA:2010
including materials according to:
NS EN 1995-2 Timber
NS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
NS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B/C/Droadbridges/footbridges/rail-
road bridges
with actions and design values
(boxed values) for bridges
SFS - Finnish Standard
Description UNIT Design
SFS EN199X-200X National Annexes SFS building construc- 5 A,B
tion
SFS EN 1992-1-1/NA:2010 Design of con-
crete structures
SFS EN 1993-1-1/NA:2010 Design of steel
structures
SFS EN 1994-1-1/NA:2010 Design of com-
posite steel and concrete structures
includingactionsandcombinationsaccord-
ing to:
SFS EN 1990/NA:2010
SFS EN 1991-1-x/NA:200x
including materials according to:
SFS EN 1995-1-1 Timber
SFS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
SFS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-18 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Description UNIT Design
CAT A1 Buildings & safety class 1
CAT A2 Buildings & safety class 2
CAT A3 Buildings & safety class 3
SFS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE National Annexes SFS - NCCI bridge con- 5 A,B
struction
SFS EN 1992-2/NCCI 2:2017 Design of
concrete structures
SFS EN 1993-2 Design of steel structures
SFS EN 1994-2/NCCI 4:2016 Design of
composite steel and concrete structures
including actions and loads according to:
SFS EN 1990/NCCI 1:2017
SFS EN 1991-2/NCCI 1:2017
including materials according to:
SFS EN 1995-2 Timber
SFS EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
SFS EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B1 Road bridges & safety class 1
CAT B2 Road bridges & safety class 2
CAT B3 Road bridges & safety class 3
CAT C1 Footbridges & safety class 1
CAT C2 Footbridges & safety class 2
CAT C3 Footbridges & safety class 3
CAT D1 Railroad bridges & safety class 1
CAT D2 Railroad bridges & safety class 2
CAT D3 Railroad bridges & safety class 3
with actions and design values
(boxed values) for bridges
SOFiSTiK2023 3-19BEMESS|InputDescription
NEN - Netherlands Standard
Description UNIT Design
NEN EN199X-200X National Annexes NEN building construc- 5 A,B
tion
NENEN1992-1-1/NA:2011Designofcon-
crete structures
NEN EN 1993-1-1 Design of steel struc-
tures
NEN EN 1994-1-1 Design of composite
steel and concrete structures
includingactionsandcombinationsaccord-
ing to:
NEN EN 1990/NA:2011
NEN EN 1991-1-x/NA:200x
including materials according to:
NEN EN 1995-1-1 Timber
NEN EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
NEN EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT A1 Buildings & safety class 1
CAT A2 Buildings & safety class 2
CAT A3 Buildings & safety class 3
NEN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE NationalAnnexesNENbridgeconstruction 5 A,B
NEN EN 1992-2/NA:2011 Design of con-
crete structures
NEN EN 1993-2 Design of steel structures
NEN EN 1994-2 Design of composite steel
and concrete structures
including actions and loads according to:
NEN EN 1990/NA:2011
NEN EN 1991-2/NA:2011
including materials according to:
NEN EN 1995-2 Timber
NEN EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
NEN EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B1 Road bridges & safety class 1
CAT B2 Road bridges & safety class 2
CAT B3 Road bridges & safety class 3
CAT C1 Footbridges & safety class 1
CAT C2 Footbridges & safety class 2
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-20 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Description UNIT Design
CAT C3 Footbridges & safety class 3
CAT D1 Railroad bridges & safety class
CAT D2 Railroad bridges & safety class
CAT D3 Railroad bridges & safety class
with actions and design values
(boxed values) for bridges
NBN - Belgian Standard
Description UNIT Design
NBN EN199X-200X National Annexes NBN building construc- 5 A,B
tion
NBNEN1992-1-1/NA:2010Designofcon-
crete structures
NBNEN1993-1-1/NA:2010Designofsteel
structures
NBN EN 1994-1-1/NA:2006 Design of
composite steel and concrete structures
including actions and combinations ac-
cording to:
NBN EN 1990/NA:2013
NBN EN 1991-1-x/NA:201x
including materials according to:
NBN EN 1995-1-1 Timber
NBN EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
NBN EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT A1 Buildings & safety class 1
CAT A2 Buildings & safety class 2
CAT A3 Buildings & safety class 3
NBN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE NationalAnnexesNBNbridgeconstruction 5 A,B
NBN EN 1992-2/NA:2014 Design of con-
crete structures
NBN EN 1993-2/NA:2011 Design of steel
structures
NBNEN1994-2Designofcompositesteel
and concrete structures
including actions and loads according to:
NBN EN 1990/NA:2013
NBN EN 1991-2/NA:2014
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-21BEMESS|InputDescription
Description UNIT Design
including materials according to:
NBN EN 1995-2 Timber
NBN EN 1996-1-1 Brickwork
NBN EN 1999-1-1 Aluminium
CAT B1 Road bridges & safety class 1
CAT B2 Road bridges & safety class 2
CAT B3 Road bridges & safety class 3
CAT C1 Footbridges & safety class 1
CAT C2 Footbridges & safety class 2
CAT C3 Footbridges & safety class 3
CAT D1 Railroad bridges & safety class
CAT D2 Railroad bridges & safety class
CAT D3 Railroad bridges & safety class
with actions and design values
(boxed values) for bridges
NZS - New Zealand Standards
Description UNIT Design
NZS 3101 Concrete Structures Standard (1995) 6 A,B
GB - Chinese Standard
Description UNIT Design
GB 50010-2010 Chinese Standard for Concrete Structures (2010 Edition 0
2015)
for default combinations according to GB 50009 - 2012
CAT A1 Buildings service life 5 years
CAT A2 Buildings service life 50 years
CAT A3 Buildings service life 100 years
GB 50010 Chinese Standard for Concrete Structures (2002) 0 A
NBR - Brazilian Standard
3-22 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Description UNIT Design
NBR 6118-2003 Norma Brasileira, Projeto de estruturas de concreto - 5 A,B
Procedimento
CAT A Edifcios
CAT B Pontes rodovirias
CAT C Passarelas de pedestres
CAT D Pontes ferrovirias
ZA - South African Standard
Description UNIT Design
ZA TMH7 Code of Practice for the Design of Highway Bridges and Cul- 6 A
verts in South Africa (1989)
CAT 0 without prestress
CAT 1/2/3 prestress for class 1/2/3
The following table describes the implemented features for the concrete design:
Design Code DESI PUNC CSIG CT CW
EN 199X-200X X X X X X
EN 199X-200X-BRIDGE
DIN EN199X-200X X X X X X
DIN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
DIN 1045 (1988) X X X X X
DAfStb hochfest.Beton
DIN 4227+A1 (1995) → DIN 1045
(1988)
DIN 1045-1 (2001) X X X X X
DIN 1045-2008 (2008) X X X X X
DIN FB102-2009 (2009) → DIN
EN1992-2004
DIN FB102-2003 (2003) → DIN1045-1
(2001)
DIN FB104-2009 (2009) → DIN
EN1992-2004
DIN FB104-2003 (2003) → DIN1045-1
(2001)
OEN EN199X-200X X X X X X
OEN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
OEN 4700 (2001) X X X X X
SOFiSTiK2023 3-23BEMESS|InputDescription
Design Code DESI PUNC CSIG CT CW
OEN 4750 (2000) → OEN 4700
SIA 26X (SIA 262 (2013)) X X X - -
BS EN199X-200X X X X X X
BS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
BS 8110 (1997) X X X - -
BS 5400 (1990) → BS 8110
SP 63-13330 (2012) X X X - -
UNE EHE (1999) X X X - -
UNI DM-2018 X X X - -
NF EN1992-2004 X X X X X
NF EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
NF BAEL (1999) X X X - -
SS EN1992-2004 X X X X X
SS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
NS EN199X-200X X X X X X
NS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
DS EN199X-200X X X X X X
DS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE X X X X X
SFS EN199X-200X → EN
199X-200X
SFS EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
NEN EN199X-200X X X X X X
NEN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
NBN EN199X-200X X X X X X
NBN EN199X-200X-BRIDGE
US ACI 318-08 → US ACI
318-14
US ACI 318-14 (2014) X X X - -
US AASHTO-2004 → US ACI
318-14
US AASHTO-2010 → US ACI
318-14
US AASHTO-2014 → US ACI
318-14
AS 3600 (2009) → AS 5100
AS 5100 (2001) X → X - -
EC2
EN
NZS 3101 (1995) → EC 2 EN
3-24 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Design Code DESI PUNC CSIG CT CW
GB 50010-2010 → BS 8110
GB 50010 → BS 8110
IS 456 (2000) → BS 8110
NBR 6118-2003 X → X - -
EC2
EN
ZA TMH7 (1989) → BS 8110
where
DESI Bending and shear design
PUNC Punching check
CSIG Crack width by permissible stresses
CT Crack width by table values
CW Crack width by calculation of crack width
SOFiSTiK2023 3-25BEMESS|InputDescription
3.4 CTRL – Control of the Design
Seealso: MREI,CRAC,NSTR,MAT,PUNC
CTRL
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Design task LT *
ULTI Reinforced concrete design for load cases
on ULS level
For load cases on SLS level an averaged
safety factor can be input in LC FACT
ACCI Reinforced concrete design
accidental design situation
EARQ Reinforced concrete design
earthquake design situation
SLS SLS design checks
→ MREI, CRAC or NSTR
STRE Linear stress calculation according
to theory of elasticitiy
default: in dependence on the system
RMOD Save mode for reinforcement or stresses: LT *
SING Single analysis, no save
SAVE Save, does overwrite already stored values
SUPE The maximum of the calculated and the al-
ready stored reinforcement is saved.
DELE delete see CTRL LCR
default: SAVE in ULS, SUPE in SLS
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-26 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Item Description Unit Default
LAY Design procedure − -
0 ULS: Baumann method, SLS Capra Maury
1 Layer design (iteration of strains)
default: 0 in ULS and crack design (1 in
prestressed slabs or skew reinforcement
THRE)
1 in stress checks
LCR Reinforcement distribution number − 1
(delete LCR’s possible with e.g. CTRL RMOD DELE
LCR 31,32)
LCRI Determination of the reinforcement maximum from − -
some design calculations
LCRP Incorporationofpunchingresultsfromanotherdesign − LCRI
DMOM Storage of ’woodarmer’ design forces (offset) [see − -
TheoreticalPrinciple-bending-procedureofdesign]
TENS Reduction of the permissible concrete compressive % 25
stress at transverse tension - default: 25%
(bigger reductions (EN 1992-1-1 6.5.2(2)) are not
applied for general slabs+shells because 6.5.2 is a
chapter for beam struds design)
25%comesfromareasonablegermanannexincase
the cracks are perpendicular to the compression and
this is the case for the main forces is a finite element
quad.
PFAI Compression failure method for shells and disks − *
1 mechanical correct analysis (default for
ULTI design)
2 doesalwaystransformintocompressionre-
inforcement (refer to Basics-Bending De-
sign of Reinforced Concrete) (default for
serviceability checks)
RO_V Maximum reinforcement for shear for normal slab re- % 0.2
gion (see also PUNC ro_v for punching region).
Value V2 for upper reinforcement, e.g. CTRL RO_V
0.4 V2 0.3
COTT Limitation of the cotangents theta for shear design − *
input permissible between 1.00 and 3.00
VLEV maximum lever arm for sher design − *
e.g. VLEV 0.9 -> max. lever arm = 0.9*d
BOUN Shear design at supports − *
further information: see below
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-27BEMESS|InputDescription
Item Description Unit Default
VMIN Minimum value for vrdc acc. EN 1992-1-1 6.2.2(1) − *
e.g. value=0.233 (=0.34/1.5) -> vmin=0.233*fck1/2
CTRL VMIN will not be considered for punching
MINS minimum shear reinforcement EN 1992-1-1 9.3.1 − *
e.g. MINS 0.6 : minimum shear reinforcement in
slabs = 0.6*minimum shear reinforcement for beams
according EN 9.3.2(2)
default 0.6 for DE and ÖNORM, otherwise 1.0
WINT Integrationofpunchingforceatwallcornersandends − (0)
0: Integration of slab shear force (default in most
cases, to be enforced with CTRL WINT 0)
1.0 or 1.5: Integration of support force
(see. theoretical principles)
WEND Length of perimeter leg at wall ends − -1.0
default: -1.0 (see. theoretical principles)
BETA Use eccentricity value beta EN 6.4.3 − *
0: exact for corner, edge and interal columns
1: exact only for edge+interal columns
2: exact beta only for interal columns,
flat beta for corner+edge
3: always use flat beta value
according EN 6.4.3(6) Fig. 6.21N
10: Germany+Austia: if (6.39)gives higher beta for
boundary or edge columns, use this higher
beta also if e/c<1.2 acc. (NDP) 6.4.3(6) as
span difference >25%
-0.1,-1,-2: exactbetaevenwhenitissmallerthan
sweeping one (-0.1 means -0)
+0 , +1 , +2: not smaller than sweeping one
exact means: calculated acc. (6.39)ff
( CTRL BETA works only with CTRL WINT 0)
default: 0 for Eurocode codes
·
2 for non-Eurocode and Denk mark a,d Spain
RADP Factor for the check radius in punching − 6.0
VPDC Consideration of creep and shrinkage during punch- − 0.12
ing check, default 12% loss of prestress
Input 0.0 : no loss
SIGZ SIGZ 0 = switching off the influence of tendons N/mm2 *
Special switch CTRL SIGZ 999 V2 0.45 : set bond
stress value to 0.45
WTEN Distribution width W for QUAD tendons, − 2.0
Input as factor of the element thickness:
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-28 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Item Description Unit Default
tendon area AZ distributed triangle wise on 2.0*ele-
ment thickness right+left
BRIC Design of volume elements − -
see DI3D : 0 = no BRIC design
BUBB Design of bubble decks − 0.55
REDN Factor for design with reduced normal force − 1.0
REDM Factor for design with reduced bending moment − 1.0
FACH 1= use ’DIN Fachbericht’ settings also for DIN-EN − 0
1992-1-1
SNIP Short term/long term loading safety factor russian − 0.9
code, default 0.9 (long term loading)
VF70 Factor for increase of the load bearing capacity for − 1.0
accidental loading situation
WALL Deep beam LT *
(see also record MAT AM3)
YES Requirements for minimum reinforcement
0.075% persideforEN9.7andDIN1045-
1
0.10% per side for Austria B 4700
0.15% per side for old EC2, old BS, ACI
(Default for disks)
NO No minimum reinforcement
(=Default for shells, system 3D)
CORE CORE Parallel computing control
WARN Special error messages can be switched off if speci- − *
fied in the error message.
V2 second value - e.g. RO_V or CTRL SLS V2 1 − -
see Theortical Principles: SLS stresses
V3 third value - e.g. CTRL BOUN − -
WithCTRLTYPEULTIcanbedefined,thattheloadcasescontaininternalforcesandmoment
in the ultimate limit state. The default for CTRL ULTI is defined in the following manner: If the
superposition occurs with actions for the design state in program MAXIMA, this is recognized
by BEMESS. The program uses the load cases as load cases with ultimate limit loads also
without an input CTRL ULTI.
In an SLS design with CTRL TYPE SLS no shear design and no punching check is done. The
functionCTRLTYPESLSisonlypossibleorsensefulincombinationwithoptionCTRLRMOD
SUPE to complete a previous ultimate limit design. As data about punching is also necessary
for the service load check, e.g. support moment reduction over the column, this information is
used from the ULS design (see CTRL LCRP).
For shear checks according to EN 1992-1-1 and a lot of other codes it is possible to input a
SOFiSTiK2023 3-29BEMESS|InputDescription
maximum percentage of reinforcement RO_V. If the normal shear check without shear rein-
forcement is not possible with the reinforcement determined from the bending, the program
attempts to increase the bending reinforcement ratio without an use of a shear reinforcement.
This succeeds mostly, particularly in the area of the moment zero points. In this case the
bending reinforcement is increased up to a maximum reinforcement ratio RO_V in percent.
BETATheoriginaleurocodewritesequation(6.44)and(6.46)forboundaryandedgecolumns.
These equations are used in all EU countries except Germany and Austria and give relative
moderate beta values. In Germany and Austria these equations shall not be used and equa-
tion(6.39) mustbe used. ThereW1 andthemoment Mshall beusedaround thecenterof the
perimeter. But this results in high beta values especially when the moment around the column
is nearly zero and e/c=0.0, because a high moment occurs around the center of the perimeter
(center of the perimeter lies far inside the slab). Now comment on german (NDP) 6.4.3 (6)
comes:
"Für Randstützen mit großen Ausmitten e / c 1,2 ist der Lasterhöhungsfaktor genauer zu er-
mitteln (z. B. nach Gleichung (6.39))."
With default BETA=0 this comment is interpreted that the flat values can be used if e/c<1.2
also if you cannot make any comment on the span relation factor.
On e/c>1.2 and high beta acc. equation (6.39) ina ddition the sector method is applied. For
this beta is the highest shear force in a sector divided by the average shear force. So it is
extractedfromthedistributionoftheshearforceintheactiveperimeter(plottomax. VZ*beta).
At least the flat eccentricity factor is used. On inner columns, the active perimeter is divided
into 8 sectors, on boundary columns into 6, on edge columns into 4.
On BETA=10, for boundary and edge columns always the beta value acc. equation (6.39) is
used.
Design case title
UsingafreeloadcasenumberforCTRLLCR(withoutnormalstaticloadcases),adesigncase
title is stored for WiNGRAF.
Superposition of various design calculation with LCRI
WithCTRLLCRI... itispossibletodeterminethereinforcementmaximum(incl. punchingrein-
forcement)fromsomepreviousdesigncalculations. Thismaximumcanbeusedthenasbasis
for the current calculation. The current calculation is saved with the reinforcement distribution
number which is defined with CTRL LCR. CTRL RMOD SUPE is activated automatically.
If LRCI and LCR are input with the same number and this number is > 1, BEMESS first calcu-
lates a new stress and then stores the maximum of this stress and the pervious one. Usage
see CSM-DESI in the fatigue check using multiple permanent parts.
If LRCI is not equal LCR, BEMESS only stores the SLS stress of the actual design, not the
maximum of LRCI and LCR, so the last LCRI SLS stress are deleted! Nevertheless the LRCI
reinforcement is taken into account! For a maximum of SLS stresses you can use a pure
superposition run without design as follows:
prog bemess
head
CTRL LCRI 1,2,3,4
CTRL LCR 11
end
3-30 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
With this also the maximum reinforcement can be generated in a BEMESS run without further
analysis.
VF70 - Factor for increase of the load bearing capacity for accidental loading situation
For power plant design the shear capacity according to DIN 1045-1 equation 70 and
105 or EN 1992-1-1 can be increased by a factor with CTRL VF70, e.g. VF70=1.15. to take
into account a reduction of the partial safety factor for these checks
REDN - Factor for design with reduced normal force and
REDM - Factor for design with reduced bending moment
A design with reduced normal forces or reduced bending moment is possible with CTRL
REDN or REDM . To design also maximum tension and maximum pressure, in any case a
previous run without REDN or REDM is necessary! Thus this option is only allowed with
parallel CTRL RMOD SUPE! To study the influence of REDN in LCR1-LCR2, the best way is
to use:
PROGBEMESS
HEADDesignwithoutreduction
CTRLLCR2
...
END
PROGBEMESS
HEADDesignwithreducednormalforces
CTRLLCR1LCRI2RMODSUPE
CTRLREDN0.8orSTEUREDM0.8
...
END
It is also possible to processed both BEMESS parts with LCR 1 (without input for LCR).
RADP - Factor the modification of the check radius for punching
The check radius for punching perimeters can be modified with CTRL RADP. Sectors
with openings or boundaries closer than 6·d to the column edge do not act in the perimeter
by default. With RADP this factor can be changed (default 6.0 for thin slabs, intern already
reduced for thick slabs).
BUBB - Design of bubble decks
In bending design, the compression zone is limited to the thickness of the outer material
layers. In shear design, the shear capacity is reduced to CTRL BUBB of the shear capacity
of a full section. (Default CTRL BUBB 0.55). The longitudinal reinforcement is taken into
accountinsheardesign [ pleaserefertoRO_V] . Shearlinksarenotallowed. Sotheexternal
shear force VED must be lower than VRDbbbe = 0.55*VRDc of a full section. The output
VED/VRDm then means VED/VRDbbbe and can be checked in WINGRAF-VED/VRDm.
Additionally, within punching perimeters, also the normal shear check will be performed for
bubble elements.
Example: see bubble_deck.dat
BOUN - Shear design at supports
SOFiSTiK2023 3-31BEMESS|InputDescription
Without further input now the shear force in case of direct support is linear reduced from the
face of the support up to xVED*d = controlling shear cut at xVED*d (see. DIN 1045-1 10.3.2(1)
and EN 1992-1-1 6.2.1(8)). The value xVED is set according to the design code and is proto-
colled in the output. It it set to 1.0 for EN, DIN 1045-1 and all new EC codes, otherwise 0.5.
With CTRL BOUN V3 ... the value xVED can be changed.
To satisfy EN-1992 6.2.1(8) ’Any shear reinforcement required should continue to the support’
theshearforceitnotreducedlinearto0%(Version2016)butto70%atthesupportface. This
factor can be input with BOUN V2 - default Voreinstellung CTRL BOUN 1+2+4 V2 0.7.
ForthecheckofVRd,m theshearforceislinearreducedonlyfromthesupportaxisuptothe
face of the support = check at the face of the support (DIN 1045-1 10.3.2(3) and EN 1992-1-1
6.2.1(8)). From the face of the support up to the controlling shear cut VRd,m is checked with
the unreduced shear force.
CTRL BOUN can controll:
BOUN 0 no reduction - shear design also over the support
BOUN +1 at supported edges the shear force is reduced from the face of the sup-
port up to xVED*d (direct support)
BOUN +2 also at shell edges with walls below (slabs in 3D-high-rise building)
BOUN +4 also at vertical shell edges (wall corner in 3D-systems - mostly indirect
support)
BOUN +8 alsoatallothershelledges(slapshangingonwalls... -indirectsupports)
(shell edge = intersection of two parts, e.g. wall/floor or wall corner)
At shell edges of type +4 and +8 indirect support is assumed and the shear force is reduced
onlyintheintersectionzone(supportaxisuptothefaceofthesupport). Tbeamsinslabsgen-
erally are takes as a direct slab support (support width = beam cross section web thickness).
Default:
1+2+4 = at direct supports and vertical edges.
3.4.1 CORE Parallel computation control
CORE Description Unit Default
VAL Number of used threads − *
SOFiSTiK supports parallel computing for selected equation solvers. Additionally, some pro-
grams offer parallel element processing capabilities – independent of the chosen equation
solver (CTRL SOLV).
Activation of parallel computing
By default parallel computing is triggered automatically where it is feasible.
Parallel computing requires corresponding hardware and operation system support. In addi-
tion, availability of an adequate SOFiSTiK license is obligatory.
3-32 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Hint
Parallel computing requires availability of a HISOLV license (ISOL granule).
Number of available threads for parallel computing
If parallel computing is active, the number of adopted threads is determined as follows (listed
with increasing priority):
a) The software retrieves the information about the number of available physical processor
cores on the system. This number defines the default number of threads that are used
when a parallel computation is activated.
b) This default can be modified via the environment variable SOF_NUM_THREADS, which is
also available as sofistik.def parameter.
c) Finally, an explicit statement CTRL CORE NN (or as relative input CTRL CORE NN[%])
temporarily assigns the number of available threads for the respective run.
Hint
Neither option b) nor option c) state an explicit parallel computation request. The deci-
sionif a parallelcomputation istriggered, dependson theactual analysisoption (parallel
processing must be supported for the specific task) and the availability of an adequate
license. Parallel computing can be suppressed by explitly setting the number of available
threads to 1 (or 0).
Parallel options for equation solvers
License
Solver CTRL SOLV Serial Parallel
Skyline Gauss/ Cholesky 1 – n.a.
Iterativ 2 HISOLV HISOLV
Sparse LDL (default) 3 – n.a.
Sparse Parallel (Pardiso) 4 HISOLV HISOLV
SOFiSTiK2023 3-33BEMESS|InputDescription
3.5 REIN – Title of the design case
Seealso: CTRL
REIN
Item Description Unit Default
TITL Title of the stored design case LT32 *
The number of the design case must be input in CTRL LCR.
3-34 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.6 CRAC – Control of the Service Load Checks
Seealso: CTRL,MAT,GRP,ELEM,NODE
CRAC
Item Description Unit Default
XMIN Minimum thickness of compressive zone [mm] 0.
1024
(not possible on multi layer reinforcement)
WK Computed crack width value [mm] -
1026
TAB check of diameters with tables LIT
via GRP + ELEM + NODE
>0 direct analysis of crack width
999 only analysis of crack width
PARA using definition in PARA
BOND Indicator of exterior surface quality: LT RIB
RIB for ripped concrete steel
PROF for shaped concrete steel
PLAI for smooth concrete steel
BET1 Coefficient Beta1 in the crack formula for wk, factor − *
which considers the bond properties
Defaults corresponding to the BOND definition:
1.0 for RIB
0.75 for PROF
0.5 for PLAI
SILO analysis for silos with
sr,max = 2*c + 1/(2*1.8)*d/ro,p,eff
Any numerical value can be input otherwise.
BET2 Input for load duration LT STAT
DYN for short time loading: implies BET2=1.0
(Heft 400)
or kt=0.6 acc. EN 1992-1-1
STAT for long term loading: implies BET2=0.5
(Heft 400)
or kt=0.4 acc. EN 1992-1-1
WKB Computed crack width value for lower side →WK WK
The simple crack width check with the limitation of the steel stress with tables is controlled
with DDES and WK=TAB via the environmental conditions or the crack width in PARA or the
SOFiSTiK2023 3-35BEMESS|InputDescription
recordsGRP,ELEMorNODE.AninputofasteelstressinPARA-SSUcanbeusedforacheck
accordingthetablebarspacing(youlookintothetable,extractyournecessarysteelstressand
inputthisinPARA-SSU).Elementswithoutdefinedsteelstressaredesignedwiththetablebar
diameters!
The ”precise” crack width check with a direct calculation (DAfStb-Heft 400 or EN 1992-1-1) is
activated via the input of PARA or a value for WK in the record CRAC. The concrete tensile
stress BETZ of the record MAT has not to be defined then to zero. The parameters WK to K1
are used only for the ”precise” check.
This record remains effective until another CRAC record is input. Without a CRAC input, no
service load checks occur!
3-36 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.7 MREI – Minimum Reinforcement
MREI
Item Description Unit Default
FFCT Factor for effective tensile strength −
KC Coefficient for stress distribution during first cracking −
K Externalconstraint-forbendingconstraintusuallyin- −
put K=1.0 is required
ROBU Robustness reinforcement −
The minimum reinforcement according to EN 1992-1-1 7.3.2 is defined with the record MREI
FFCT, KC and K. In Germany the increase of hc,ef acc. figure 7.1d is taken into account. A
tendon reinforcement is not taken into account, the MREI crack moment is calculated into a
necessary normal reinforcement.
The factor of the effective tensile strength results as follows:
ƒ = FFCT · ƒ
ct,eƒƒ ctm
Minimum 3.0 N/mm2 (leightweight concrete) are used for FFCT = 1.0.
Withoutan inputforKCthe coefficientisdetermined fromtheaxialforce forthree-dimensional
systems. Reasonable inputs are:
MREI FFCT 1.0 KC 0.4 K 1.0 for bending constraint
MREI FFCT 0.5 KC 1.0 for centric constraint from hydration heat
TheitemKiscalculatedindependenceofthedepth. Forexternalconstraint(columnsettlement
or bending constraint) it should be input with k=1.0.
The determination of the minimum reinforcement requires an input of the crack width WKU
and WKL in record GRP respectively in the design parameter dialog! For a parallel explicit
crack width input in CRAK WK (EN 1992-1-1 7.3.4), this is used also for the minimum rein-
forcement. Ifthelimitationofthecrackwidthaccordingtotables(EN1992-1-17.3.3)isdesired
simultaneouslywithCRAKWKTAB,WKUandSIGUcanbeinputinrecordGRP(orthedesign
parameter dialog)! Then WKU is used for the minimum reinforcement and SIGA is used for
the limitation of the crack width without a direct calculation according to tables (EN 1992-1-1
7.3.3).
Example: see bemess6_design.dat
ROBU:thecheckofaminimumreinforcementforthesafetyofaductilememberbehaviour(ro-
bustness reinforcement) occurs with an input for ROBU. With MREI ROBU FCTM the check is
performedwiththeconcretetensilestrengthfctm,withMREIitisperformedwithfctk. However,
a different tensile strength may be input with ROBU, e.g. MREI ROBU=2.50 (N/mm2).
SOFiSTiK2023 3-37BEMESS|InputDescription
The minimum reinforcement is then calculated according EN 1992 9.2.1.1(1) equation (9.1N).
Only for german design codes a crack moment is calculated and designed with a fixed lever
arm value kz=0.9 and the steel yield strength fyk according (NDP) 9.2.1.1 (1).
Therobutsnessreinforcementisalwaysappliedatthebottomofasection. Ontoponlyincase
ofappearingtensilestresses. Torecognizethisitisnecessarytodefineapermanentloadcase
for this check may be with a little factor only, e.g. LC (2721 2726 1) FACT 0.001.
Usually the robustness reinforcement on the top has to be placed over a length of up to a
quarter of the span length.
Varying MREI input for different groups is not possible in one run, but you can make multiple
PROG BEMESS runs with different GRP selection.
3-38 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.8 SHFT – Offset Value for Shift Rule
SHFT
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Consideration of the offset value for shift rule − 0
0 does not consider
1 Consideration according to EC 2 method
WiththeinputSHFT1anadditionalnormalforceisappliedandleadstoashiftsinthebending
reinforcment. Near supports up to 0.5·z·cot-theta, the shear force is reduced respectively.
Toavoidanunnecessaryincreaseoflongitudinalreinforcementinmidspan,theminimumcom-
pression strut angle is reduced with a default CTRL COTT 7/4.
Example see (german) versatz.dat
SOFiSTiK2023 3-39BEMESS|InputDescription
3.9 NSTR – SLS Checks
Seealso: ECHO,CTRL,MAT,LC
NSTR
Item Description Unit Default
SIGS Stress range of longitudinal reinforcement N/mm2 -
Reinforcement will be increased if necessary.
NSTR SIGS 999 only checks the stress range.
SIGT Stress range for shear reinforcement. N/mm2 0.454*
Default 0.454*SIGS due to small bending diameter. SIGS
Reinforcementwillbeincreasedifnecessary. Punch-
ing shear reinforcement will not be increased.
Spezial input negative SIGT see below
SIGP Stress range for prestressing steel N/mm2 -
BEMESStriestoreachthisbyincreasinglongitudinal
reinforcement. Ifthisisnotpossibleawarningoccurs.
CHKC Maximum concrete compression stress −,N/mm2 0
0.45 Check to 0.45 fckl
0 No control
>1.5 input directly in N/mm2
In the layer design (default on NSTR) reinforcement
will be increased if necessary (and if possible).
On CTRL LAY 0 (Baumann) reinforcement will not be
increased - check only.
On CTRL LAY 1 a pure check without increase can
bei made with NSTR CHCK -0.45 (negative value).
CHKR Maximum steel stress −,N/mm2 0
0.8 Check to 0.8 fyk
0 No control
>1.5 input directly in N/mm2
Reinforcement will be increased if necessary.
DECO check distance decompression check [mm] -
1011
FATC FatigueageofconcreteFATC.Nolongerused,please - -
definefcd-fatinthematerial, seeAQUACONCFFAT.
Also possible as AQUA-Restart see AQUA CTRL
REST
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-40 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Item Description Unit Default
Correction coefficients λs according to:
DIN-FB 102 Anhang A.106.2 or:
1992-2 NN.2.1(NN.101)/NN.3.1(NN.106)
LS_U upper reinforcement − -
LS_L lower reinforcement − -
LS_V shear reinforcement − -
LS_P prestressing steel − -
LC14 concrete produkt λc1*λc2*λc3*λc4 − -
λc0 is calculated by the program and used
Without LC14 input the check is done according EN
1992-1-1 6.8.7 (6.77), e.g. with NSTR SIGS 999
LS_U 1 1, with LC14=0 no concrete fatigue check is
done at all,
with LC14 input the check is done with sigma-c-perm
according EN 1992-2 NN.3.2(NN.112)
Increase factors axle load of load model 3
FACU upper reinforcement − 1.0
FACL lower reinforcement − 1.0
FACV shear reinforcement − 1.0
FACP prestressing steel − 1.0
LOCP Local directions of tendons on CTRL LAY 0 − -
In the layer design, tendons are analyzed exactly. So
an input LOCP is only allowed for CTRL LAY 0 and
then means:
0 Stress range, determines with maximum of
thestressrangeofthemainandtransverse
reinforcements (default)
1 Stress range, determines with the stress
range of the main reinforcement
2 Stress range, determines with the stress
range of the transverse reinforcement
G_SD gamma-sd fatigue to LC14. In EN1992-2 (NN.112) − 1.00
gamma-sd is written, but it should be gamma-Ed,fat
Attention: Using SIGS, SIGT, CHKR, LS_U, LS_L, LS_V, FAKU, FAKL or FAKV, the reinforce-
ment will be increased to fulfil the check.
The stress range of the reinforcement may be verified with the input NSTR SIGS. At first a
normal design occurs with possible additional serviceability checks. Then a possible already
saved reinforcement is considered at CTRL BMOD SUPE. For each load case the reinforce-
SOFiSTiK2023 3-41BEMESS|InputDescription
ment stress in computed. The minimum and maximum value of all load cases then give the
stressrange. Toavoidmisunderstanding,onlyaninputof100%permanentfactor(LC...PERC
usedforotherchecks)isallowedusingNSTR.Thesetofloadcaseswith/withoutliveloadpart
has to be produced with MAXIMA in advance. If the stress range is to large, the reinforcement
is increased correspondingly.
AlsotheelementsthatdonotrequireanyreinforcementincreaseareprintedwithECHONSTR
FULL. ECHO SIGS NSTR produces the stresses of the single load cases as well as the used
updatedleverarms. IfafurthercalculationisstartedwithCTRLBMODSUPEafteraBEMESS
calculation with a stress range check, smaller stress range are determined in this second
calculation, because the reinforcement increased in the previous calculation is used for the
stress determination (= control of the reinforcement increase).
At first a design in the ultimate limit state should be performed usually. Then an separate
BEMESS stress range check occurs with CTRL BMOD SUPE for possible other serviceability
load cases from the program MAXIMA.
Fortheshearlinkstressrange(SIGT)thesquarerouteofthestrutinclinationisusedaccording
to EN 1992-1-1 6.8.2(3) (6.65). It is also checked whether the direction of the shear force
alternates in the different load cases, because it is an indication for decompression: E.g. if LC
1 has Vx=+100 and LC 2 has Vx=-100, then both load cases have the same shear stress but
the shear force changes through zero from LC 1 to LC 2!
WithspezialinputofanegativeSIGTe.g. -120alwaysastressrangeinshearreinforcementis
calculated. This automatically causes shear reinforcement in every element. With this feature
you can check if the then necessary shear reinforcement is smaller than an anyway placed
minimum shear reinforcement (that you cannot input up to now).
A stress range is not considered for the punching check! Over punching nodes no shear rein-
forcementwillbeincreasedduetoSIGT!Forgraphicalchecks,thelinkstressrangecomputed
from the real slab shear force is calculated and stored for WinGRAF.
DECO: for the decompression check according EN 1992-1-1 7.3.1 the check distance (default
100mm) is taken from the .ini file and thus adjusted to the design code. Via input e.g. NSTR
DECO 120[mm] the check distance can be changed individually (without h/10 limitation). In
every stress check with NSTR (also pure input NSTR) the maximum decompression strain in
thedirectionoftendonsinthecheckdistanceaboveandbelowtheductsurfacearecalculated
and stored for WINGRAF.
Example prestressed_slab.dat or in CSM DESI: csm32_slab_design.dat
Fatigue check
The fatigue check for concrete according to DIN-FB 102-(4.188) or EN-1991-1-1 is con-
trolled via LC14. With additional input to LC14 and a permanent loadcase the check is done
with sigma_c,perm. λc0 is calculated by the Programm. The simple check is then done in
addition for comparison reasons.
A fatigue check for steel is realized, if at least an input for LS_U, LS_L, LS_V, FAKU, FAKL or
FAKV is done. Here SIGS means according to 4.3.7.5 DIN-FB 102 or EN-1991-1-1:
SGS = Δσ (N∗)
Rsk
3-42 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Example for fatigue check:
prestressed_slab.dat or in CSM DESI: csm32_slab_design.dat
SOFiSTiK2023 3-43BEMESS|InputDescription
3.10 MAT – Input of Material Properties
Seealso: CTRL,CRAC,NSTR
MAT
Item Description Unit Default
CONC Concrete and steel class must be defined − -
STEE in AQUA or the SSD − -
K Control parameters for the shear check LT K1S
K1 Span reinforcement is continuous. (>50%)
K1S Span reinforcement is in steps
MINC Minimum transverse reinforcement − 0.0
The transverse reinforcement is at least MINC times
the main reinforcement.
MSTA Character of the loading LT YES
YES mainly stationary loading
NO not mainly stationary loading
AM3 Minimum reinforcement of pressed cross sections (in % *
percentage of the statically required cross section)
Default: (see also CTRL WALL)
0.8 for DIN1045-1988
0.0 for DIN 1045-1,EN1992,
BS,ACI, OENORM
FC Effective concrete design strength MP *
FY Steel yield limit MP *
FC and FY can be changed up to 30% from their de-
fault values.
FYS Yield limit shear aud punching shear reinforcement MP *
SC1 Concrete material safety bending − *
SC2 Concrete safety compression members − *
SS1 Steel material safety tension and bending − *
SS2 Steel safety compression reinforcement − *
default depending on CTRL REIN/ULTI and the code
C1 Maximum concrete compression strain o/oo *
C1 is are only allowed in the layer design
S2 Maximum reinforcement tensile strain o/oo *
3-44 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Input of the material properties from the database:
The materials of the database are used as default, if they are concrete and steel mate-
rials. They can be changed, mainly FC, FY and the safety factors.
MSTAcontrolsthecomputationalreductionoftheshearstressintheshearzone3fortheshear
design according to DIN1045-1988.
Defaults of the safeties:
SC1 SC2 SS1 SS2
DIN 1045-1 (REIN+ULTI) 1.50 1.50 1.15 1.15
DIN-1045-1988 (REIN) 1.75 2.10 1.75 2.10
DIN-1045-1988 (ULTI) 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
OENORM (REIN+ULTI) 1.50 1.50 1.15 1.15
EN 1992-1-1 (REIN+ULTI) 1.50 1.50 1.15 1.15
British Standard ” 1.50 1.50 1.05 1.05
American ACI ” 1/0.9 1/0.65 1/0.9 1/0.65
SOFiSTiK2023 3-45BEMESS|InputDescription
3.11 GEOM – Input of the Cross Section
Seealso: DIRE,THRE,MAT,PARA
GEOM
Item Description Unit Default
H Plate thickness [mm] *
1011
Default: as available in the database
HA Centredistanceoftheuppermainreinforcementfrom [mm] 35
1024
the upper plate edge
DHA Centre distance of the upper transverse or middle re- [mm] 10
1024
inforcement from the main reinforcement
HB Centredistanceofthelowermainreinforcementfrom [mm] HA
1024
the lower plate edge
DHB Centre distance of the lower transverse or middle re- [mm] DHA
1024
inforcement from the main reinforcement
DDHA Centredistanceoftheupperinnerreinforcementfrom [mm] DHA
1024
the middle reinforcement
DDHB Centredistanceofthelowerinnerreinforcementfrom [mm] DHB
1024
the middle reinforcement
HPRE Limitation of the compression zone thickness [mm] -
1024
The values HU - DDHB are usually input in a separate BEMESS run or the SSD design pa-
rameter dialog.
AninputHorHPREcannotbedoneinaparameterdefinitiionrun(PARA).AninputHorHPRE
is only allowed in a separate design run. Without input to HU-DDHB then H and HPRE can be
used in combination with the PARA values for an individual design run. If HU-DDHB is input
then no values are taken from a previous PARA run or the SSD design parameter dialog.
The inputs for HA, DHA, HB, DHB, DDHA and DDHB have no effect for disk structures. The
input DIRE UPP, GEOM HA,DHA and PARA DU,ASU,ASU2 count for one side of the disc, on
theothersidethesamevaluesareused. IntheoutputyougetanASUandanASL,bothmust
be placed. In WINGRAF only ASU is served, on the other side the same reinforcement must
be placed.
This record remainseffective until another record GEOMis input. More explanations are to be
found in the description of the records DIRE and THRE.
3-46 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Note
The design of orthotropic plates by BEMESS requires additional effort. A different thickness
should be defined for each load case and each direction of the principal moments. In such
cases BEMESS prints a warning; the user should specify the thickness explicitly with GEOM
D.
HO
DHO
DDHO
D
DDHU
DHU
HU
1:Geometryofthereinforcedconcretecrosssection(O=upperside U=lo
Figure3.1: Geometryofthereinforcedconcretecrosssection(O=upperside,U=lowerside)
The used compression zone thickness may be limited for the design of hollow plates with the
input possibility GEOM...HPRE. In this way the hollow plates or the bouble-deck plates can
be calculated. However, a shear design does not occur. The shear force has to be checked
separately.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-47BEMESS|InputDescription
3.12 DIRE – Definition of Orthogonal Two-course Reinforcement
Seealso: GEOM,THRE,MAT,PARA
DIRE
Item Description Unit Default
UPP Angle between the upper main reinforcement direc- degrees 0
tion and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
LOW Anglebetweenthelowermainreinforcementdirection degrees 0
and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
X Centre for a circular plate design [m] -
1001
Y The angles defined with UPP and LOW [m] -
1001
Z refer to the direction vector from the input centre to [m] -
1001
the design point. The axis is defined in the case of
three-dimensional structures.
An orthogonal steel mesh can be laid both at the upper (support reinforcement) than also at
the lower side (span reinforcement). The direction of the main reinforcement is specified and
the transverse reinforcement is perpendicular to it. Clockwise angles are positive and they are
defined in degrees. They are relative to the x axis of the local coordinate system, which is in
the case of plane problems identical with the global coordinate system. The location of the
coordinate system in three-dimensional cases can be defined in SOFIMSHA/SOFIMSHB.
The inputs for LOW has no effect for disk structures. The input DIRE UPP, GEOM HA,DHA
andPARADU,ASU,ASU2countforonesideofthedisc,ontheothersidethesamevaluesare
used. IntheoutputyougetanASUandanASL,bothmustbeplaced. InWINGRAFonlyASU
is served, on the other side the same reinforcement must be placed.
A design in ultimate limit state can be done with a symmetrical and centric reinforcement for
shell systems (SYST SPAC):
DIRE LOW SYM defines a symmetric reinforcement
DIRE LOW CENT defines an (upper) centric reinforcement
(without lower reinforcement)
For hight concrete cover, the upper and lower reinforcement often are close together. Defining
a symmetric reinforcement it is now taken into account that the reinforcement at the concrete
compression side also gets tension and helps the tension side reinforcement. An increase of
lever arm is taken into account.
Example file: symmetric.dat
A special option allows the design of a circular mesh reinforcement by defining a reference
circle centre and the items UPP/LOW equal to 0 or 90 degrees. Then the radial or tangential
reinforcement lies at the outer side.
3-48 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Inthecaseofthree-dimensionalsystems,Z=0definesaZaxisthroughthepointX,Y.IfZisnot
equalto0,thenX=0definesaXaxisthroughY,Z,andY=0aYaxisthroughX,Z.Thetangential
directionhaspriorityagainsttheradialdirectioninthecaseofdiagonallycutelements. AtDIRE
00the2nd layerliesthentangential,whilethe1st layercandeviateperpendicularlytotheradial
direction.
In the normal case of the spiral stair the input DIRE 0 0 - 0 0 0 is correct for all elements.
The stair links lie then as principal direction outside in radial direction, the structural bars are
tangential in the 2nd layer (with X=Y=0 = spiral axis).
This record remains effective until another record DIRE (or THRE) is input.
X
upper side transverse reinforcement
lower side
main reinforcement
Y
Figure3.2: GeometryofthereinforcementlayersforDIRE
Figure3.3: Definitionofatwo-layercircularreinforcement
SOFiSTiK2023 3-49BEMESS|InputDescription
3.13 THRE – Definition of Skew 2- and 3-course Reinforcement
Seealso: GEOM,DIRE,MAT,PARA
THRE
Item Description Unit Default
ABEX Angle between the upper outer reinforcement direc- degrees 0.
tion and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
ABMI Anglebetween theuppermiddle reinforcementdirec- degrees 90.
tion and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
ABIN Angle between the upper inner reinforcement direc- degrees -
tion and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
BEEX Angle between the lower outer reinforcement direc- degrees 0.
tion and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
BEMI Angle between the lower middle reinforcement direc- degrees 90.
tion and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
BEIN Anglebetweenthelowerinnerreinforcementdirection degrees -
and the local x axis
(between 0 and 180)
The upper reinforcement mesh (support reinforcement) and the lower reinforcement mesh
(span reinforcement) are selected independently of each other; thus two- and three-course
reinforcementissimultaneouslypossible. Anorthogonaltwo-coursereinforcementlaidatboth
sidesshouldbespecified,however,bymeansoftherecordDIRE.Theanglesofthereinforce-
ment directions are defined in degrees and they are positive in the clockwise direction. They
are relative to the x axis of the local coordinate system. The terms main and transverse rein-
forcementinTHREareusedanalogously,e.g. inreferencetothepercentageparameterMINC
of the input record MAT.
The inputs for BEEX, BEMI and BEIN have no effect for disk structures. The input DIRE UPP,
GEOMHA,DHAandPARADU,ASU,ASU2countforonesideofthedisc,ontheothersidethe
same values are used. In the output you get an ASU and an ASL, both must be placed. In
WINGRAF only ASU is served, on the other side the same reinforcement must be placed.
3-50 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
An SLS check of minimum compression height cannot be performed for skew two- and three-
course meshes.
This record remains effective until another THRE (or DIRE) record is input.
ABMI or BEMI
ABEX
or ABIN
BEEX or
BEIN
Middle Layer
Outer Layer
Inner Layer
Figure3.4: GeometryofthereinforcementlayersforTHRE
SOFiSTiK2023 3-51BEMESS|InputDescription
3.14 DI3D – Definition BRIC Reinforcement
Seealso: PARA
DI3D
Item Description Unit Default
OAL Meridian angle, input in rad, rd 0
for 10 degree please input 10*3.14/180 or 10[°]
Definition see AQUA-MATE manual ”Geology”
OAF Descent angle rd 0
X Centre for a circular reinforcement [m] -
Y [m] -
Z [m] -
The design of volume elements is based on a tension force covering of the stress tensor
according a paper of P.C.J. Hoogenboom and A. de Boer: ”Computation of reinforcement for
solid concrete” Heron Heft 53 2008 no 4. In tension, the reinforcement steel is used up to
the trilinear limit. With the new input DI3D a reinforcement direction can be defined for BRIC
elements.
Example see bric_design.dat
Possible definitions:
DI3D 0 0
1. reinforcement direction = global-X 2.=global-Y 3.=global-Z
DI3D OAL...OAF... without input to a centre:
first rotation OAL around global-Z
then rotation OAF around new 1. reinforcement direction
DI3D with input to a centre:
X and Y are allowed in addition to OAL+OAF.
Input Z only allowed with OAL=OAF=0
- circular reinforcement around X,Y (without Z input):
Standard case OAL=OAF=0:
e.g. wind power plant foundation or tank:
DI3D OAL 0 OAF 0 X 0 Y 0
1. reinforcement = radial
2. reinforcement = tangential
3. reinforcement = global z
Spezial case with OAL+OAF:
Additional rotation OAL around global-Z
then rotation around new 1. reinforcement direction
3-52 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
e.g. tank with 30 degree cone:
DI3D OAL 90 OAF 30 X 0 Y 0
Special input additional Z: only allowed with OAL=OAF=0:
input Y,Z without X: rotational axis = X around point Y,Z
input X,Z without Y: rotational axis = Y around point X,Z
SOFiSTiK2023 3-53BEMESS|InputDescription
3.15 LAY – Definition of Multi Layer Reinforcement
Seealso: GEOM,THRE,PARA
LAY
Item Description Unit Default
POS Position of the reinforcement LT !
UPP Z = distance to upper face
CENT Z = distance to center
LOW Z = distance to lower face
Z Centre distance of the reinforcement [mm] !
1024
DIRE Angle to the local x axis (between 0 and 180) Atgrd 0.
D Diameter, 0=do not design these elements [mm] -
1023
can also be set in PARA with PARA...DU 0
AS Minimum reinforcement [cm2/m] -
ASMA Maximum reinforcement. When this is reached the [cm2/m] -
next inner layer will be filled. Do not input ASMA for
most inner reinforcement!
BS MaximumreinforcementfornonlinearanalysisinASE [cm2/m] -
(ASE-> REIQ) - not used in BEMESS
WK Crack width [mm] -
1026
SS Steel stress in SLS crack check (for CRAC WK TAB [MP] -
1092
alternative to WK)
For an element maximum 40 layers can be defined.
Example see bemess8_multi_layer_design.dat:
Figure3.5: 4upperlayer,6lowerlayer(3inx+3iny=6)
All SLS checks can be done.
Thecrackwidthdesignisdoneforthemostouterlayers,buttheinnerlayersparticipateonthe
reinforcement ratio and the effective height as shown in Figure 2.9.
3-54 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Multilayer reinforcement can also be used in a nonlinear ASE analysis.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-55BEMESS|InputDescription
3.16 PARA – Design Parameter
Seealso: GEOM,DIRE,THRE,LAY,PUNC,MREI
PARA
Item Description Unit Default
NOG Group number −/LT *
* no input: default for all groups.
SAR (or GAR): structural area number
Secondary groups: are allowed
selection with xmin-xmax: see below
example bemess6_design.dat
NOEL Element number − -
or for SAR - structural area number
DU Reinforcement diameter upper 1st layer [mm] 10
1023
DU=0: do not design this group
DU2 Reinforcement diameter upper 2nd layer DU*
DU3 Reinforcement diameter upper 3rd layer DU2*
* no default in case of TYPE MOD!
DL Reinforcement diameter lower 1st layer DU*
DL2 Reinforcement diameter lower 2nd layer DL*
DL3 Reinforcement diameter lower 3rd layer DL2*
WKU Crack width upper 1st layer [mm] -
1026
WKU2 Crack width upper 2nd layer WKU*
WKU3 Crack width upper 3rd layer WKU2*
* no default in case of TYPE MOD!
WKL Crack width lower 1st layer WKU*
WKL2 Crack width lower 2nd layer WKL*
WKL3 Crack width lower 3rd layer WKL2*
SSU Steel stress upper 1st layer [N/mm2] -
SSU2 Steel stress upper 2nd layer 1092 SSU*
SSU3 Steel stress upper 3rd layer SSU2*
* no default in case of TYPE MOD!
SSL Steel stress lower 1st layer SSU*
SSL2 Steel stress lower 2nd layer SSL*
SSL3 Steel stress lower 3rd layer SSL2*
ASU Minimum reinforcement upper 1st layer [cm2/m] -
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-56 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Item Description Unit Default
ASU2 Minimum reinforcement upper 2nd layer 1021 -
ASU3 Minimum reinforcement upper 3rd layer -
Usage of minimum reinforcement
please refer to MREI PARA
ASL Minimum reinforcement lower 1st layer -
ASL2 Minimum reinforcement lower 2nd layer -
ASL3 Minimum reinforcement lower 3rd layer -
BSU Maximum reinforcement upper 1st layer [cm2/m] -
BSU2 Maximum reinforcement upper 2nd layer 1021 -
BSU3 Maximum reinforcement upper 3rd layer -
The maximum reinf. is not used in
BEMESS but only for nonlinear analysis
in ASE. Please refer to ASE ->REIQ
BSL Maximum reinforcement lower 1st layer -
BSL2 Maximum reinforcement lower 2nd layer -
BSL3 Maximum reinforcement lower 3rd layer -
TYPE Modification of individual design parameters − -
MOD overwritesonlyinthisinputlinedefinedval-
ues, defaults inactive. Does not work in
combination with DIRE+GEOM!
XMIN Selection box: parameters are only applied [m] -
1001
XMAX if the center of a quad lies inside this box. [m] -
1001
YMIN Can be mixed with an NOG input. [m] -
1001
YMAX [m] -
1001
ZMIN no input : up to infinite [m] -
1001
ZMAX [m] -
1001
ROT rotation around the center of the box in the XY plane [degree] -
The design parameter should be input only once in a separate BEMESS run of the SSD task
design parameter. Then they are available in the database for all following calculations.
All inputs from DIRE, THRE and GEOM (except for GEOM-D) can be done. A following PARA
input is necessary to close a group or element selection. The first PARA input has a special
meaning. It is always also a predefinition for all elements, also for all following PARA inputs.
The inputs for DL,WKL,SSL und ASL have no effect for disk structures. The input DIRE UPP,
GEOMHA,DHAandPARADU,ASU,ASU2countforonesideofthedisc,ontheothersidethe
same values are used. In the output you get an ASU and an ASL, both must be placed. In
WINGRAF only ASU is served, on the other side the same reinforcement must be placed.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-57BEMESS|InputDescription
Manual inputs for PUNC are saved also in the database. They have to be defined only in one
BEMESS input.
With PARA ... TYPE MOD only defined values of this input line are used for special groups or
elements. Previous global data to DIRE or GEOM are not changed. So no (DIRE) or (GEOM)
input is allowed directly before a PARA-MOD line! Also defaults e.g. for DU2=DU are not set.
All values that shall be modified must be set! Usage e.g.:
GEOM-HA25DHA10HB25DHB10 $ExpositionXC1
PARANOG-DU10WKU0.40 $classF
GEOM-HA40DHA10HB40DHB10 $ExpositionXC4
PARANOG3DL20WKL0.30 $classE
$
PARANOEL20710,20711DU16DL14DL214TYPEMOD $doesnotchangedu2!
ThistypeofinputisonlyallowedintheASCIIinputandisnotsupportedviatheSSDreinforce-
ment dialogue. An input Type MOD is also not shown consequently in WINGRAF-System-
Quad-minimum-reinforcement. For this please start a BEMESS design and check the rein-
forcement in Design-Reinforcement-loadcase.
Example: see bemess6_design.dat
With PARA NOG ... DU=0 a group can be switched off from design.
3-58 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.17 PUNC – Punching Design
Seealso: ECHO,CTRL,LC,PARA,MREI,SELE
PUNC
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Design mode - punching type LT *
NO No punching design
CHEK only check punching (reinforcement in-
crease only by minimum reinforcement
MMOM)
YES Input for column nodes (default)
COL as YES: Input for columns
WALL Input for wall ends and corners
FOUN Input for foundation slabs
No Node number for following data
X Coordinates of the punching node [m] -
1001
Y (if number unknown (assigned free)) [m] -
1001
Z [m] -
1001
D Column or wall thickness [mm] -
1011
only in special case, usually defined in SOFIPLUS
B ColumnwidthB=0definesacircularcolumnwiththe [mm] -
1011
diameter D
HEAD Column head or necessary check LT -
- column head, normal punching design
CHEK only check punching: input for individual
nodes e.g. PUNC 37 HEAD chek
OFF node is not a punching node (see also
SELE ... 0)
DHEA Total thickness in the zone of the enlarged column [mm] 0
1011
head (usually from SOFIPLUS)
RO_V Maximumbendingreinforcementratioduetoshearin % 1.5
the punching area
If a design without shear reinforcement would require
ahigherbendingreinforcementthanRO_V,BEMESS
switches to the check with shear reinforcement
LC_P Load case of the corresponding maximum soil pres- − -
sure (foundation plate)
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-59BEMESS|InputDescription
Item Description Unit Default
The soil pressure inside the punching circle dK re-
duces the maximum column load P for the punching
check, only allowed for TYPE=FOUN
VPD Shear force component of tendons [kN] -
1102
RO_M Maximum reinforcement ratio for increase of longitu- % -
dinal reinforcement. See below
RO_L Minimum longitudinal reinforcement if the punching % *
check requires links
MMOM FactoronminimumdesignmomentsaccordingtoDIN − 1.0
1045-1 10.5.6 table 14 or EN
0.0 minimummoments+kollapsreinforcement
switched off
default: 1.0
HRED Reduction of thickness: minimum of quad thickness [mm] -
1011
and HRED will be used
BETA Excentricity factor, see also CTRL BETA - -
beta can only be increased, the flat value is always
taken. Without input TYPE this BETA is only used for
columns (not for walls).
KPU Factor on VRD,max for studrails, see below - -
Thepunchingcheckisperformedwiththemaximumsupportreaction. Ifnosupportreactionis
found or the shear stress is too low, no punching check occurs.
Individual nodes can be deactivated for punching, either with PUNC no. HEAD OFF or with
SELE no. 0
Effect on a SSD design task see SELE.
Without input of a node number or X,Y,Z the following data are used for all punching nodes of
type TYPE COL/WALL/FOUN.
If punching shear links are necessary (if check without links and RO_V fails), not RO_V is
taken for longitudinal reinforcement but only the minimum reinforcement necessary including
links. As sometimes then too high shear reinforcement would be necessary, RO_L can be
used to define a longitudinal reinforcement that is used if shear reinforcement is necessary.
With RO_V=RO_M=RO_L a fixed reinforcement can be set.
3-60 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
Thecheckdirectlyatthecolumnheadsometimescanrequireahighlongitudinalreinforcement.
To avoid this an input RO_M can be set. If that check would require a higher longitudinal
reinforcement the punching check i set to undesignable (without increase of reinforcement).
So PUNC RO_V controls to switch to shear studs, PUNC RO_L which longitudinal reinforce-
mentshallbetakeninthatcaseandPUNCRO_Mcontrolsifaveryhighlongitudinalreinforce-
ment is senseful at all.
A collapse reinforcement according to EN 1992-1-1 9.4.1(3) is considered automatically (also
on PUNC NO or PUNC CHEK, can be switched off there with MMOM=0). In this case the
reinforcement Ved/fyk is distributed at the effective column circumference. No collapse rein-
forcement is used at wall ends.
Studrails: with the input PUNC KPU a factor for VRD,max can be input. Then the check in the
critical perimeter u1 is done with VRD,max = kpu,sl * VRD,c. Most ETA technical reports allow
a factor of 1.96. It is only checked if VRD,max is OK, the design then must be made extern
with the spezifications of the studrail producer. For codes that do not have a check VRD,max
at perimeter u1, input KPU is not allowed.
In WINGRAF a reinforcement of 9999[cm2] is plotted to mark that a separate studrail design
must follow.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-61BEMESS|InputDescription
3.18 LC – Selection of Design Load Cases
Seealso: ECHO,CTRL,PUNC,S
LC
Item Description Unit Default
NO Load cases, for which a design is to be performed − -
or
InputofadesigncombinationfromprogramMAXIMA
DESI or (D) Design combination
ACCI or (A) Accidental combination
EARQ or (E) Combination for earthquake
PERM or (P) Quasi-permanent combination
RARE or (R) Rare or characteristic combina-
tion
FREQ or (F) Frequent comb.
NONF or (N) Non-frequent comb.
ULTI aftersuperpositiononULSlevelwithoutac-
tions
SERV aftersuperpositiononSLSlevelwithoutac-
tions
PERC FactorofthepermanentloadforSLSchecks(onlyold %/LT 100
design codes)
FortendonsorEN-1992fatigue,literalPERC’PERM’
defines the permanent load case (level)
FACT Factor for single load cases − -
SELE Only for CSM DESI superposition loadcases: − -
’M’ only use mami bending moment loadcases
e.g. LC ’rare’ SELE M, so that in the crack design the
mami-Vz loadcases must not be designed
With LC DESI/ULTI the load cases which were superpositioned with program MAXIMA for the
design with ultimate limit loads are selected automatically. For codes with actions, LC DESI
hastobetaken,forcodeswithoutactions,LCULTIismorecorrect. Pleasechecktheselected
load cases in the BEMESS output.
Using LC ACCI/EARQ please check the material safety factors (see record MAT).
The input of the load cases with maximum support reactions is also necessary for punching
checks.
3-62 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.19 GRP – Selection of Groups
Seealso: LC,ELEM,NODE
GRP
Item Description Unit Default
NO Group number or secondary group literal −/LT *
Default: all groups
or:
SAR structural area number − *
CS construction stage for tendon activation − *
an input with only CS (GRP CS 12) only sets CS
All elements and nodes of the defined groups are used for the checks with the record GRP. In
this way GRP replaces the records ELEM and NODE.
For secondary groups only the elements are selected, not the nodes.
Incaseagroupshallnotbedesigned,agroupcanalsobeswitchedofffromdesignwithPARA
NOG ... DU=0.
WiththedefaultCS9998alltendonsareactive,tendonswithICS2=0orICS2=9999aretreated
as unbonded.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-63BEMESS|InputDescription
3.20 ELEM – Selection of Elements
Seealso: LC,CRAC,GRP,NODE
ELEM
Item Description Unit Default
FROM Start element number −/LT *
or ’GRP’ for input of a group number or a secondary
group in TO
To select a group better use GRP because then also
the nodes of the group are selected.
TO End element number (or group) −/LT FROM
INC Increment − 1
AdesignorastressanalysisfortheloadcaseLCiscarriedoutforallelementsfromFROMto
TO in increments of INC.
Incaseagroupshallnotbedesigned,agroupcanalsebeswitchedofffromdesignwithPARA
NOG ... D0=0.
In input ELEM can bei used especially to check the design in one element with ECHO FULL
EXTR.
Alternatively to ELEM you can also work with ECHO ELEM, then all elements are designed
but the output only prints the selected elements. Then automatically an extended output is
started, the layer design stress plot is only done for the first element of the ECHO ELEM list.
See example bemess.dat/english/bemess8_multi_layer_design.dat
3-64 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.21 NODE – Selection of Nodes
Seealso: LC,GRP,ELEM
NODE
Item Description Unit Default
FROM Start node number − *
Default: Smallest saved node number
TO End node number − FROM
INC Increment − 1
GROU Node groups − *
Default: all groups
To select a group better use GRP because then also
the elements of the group are selected.
A design for the load case LC is carried out for all nodes from FROM to TO in increments of
INC.
In input NODE can bei used especially to check the design in one node with ECHO FULL
EXTR.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-65BEMESS|InputDescription
3.22 SELE – Selection of Punching Points
Seealso: PUNC
SELE
Item Description Unit Default
NO Node number − -
TYPE Use of the selection − 1
0 is not used
1 is used
GRP group number (alternative to NO) − -
Individual nodes can be deactivated for punching,
e.g. node 17 either with PUNC 17 HEAD OFF or with SELE 17 TYPE 0
TheadvantageofSELEisthatyougenerallydefinethepossiblenodesfortheautomaticpunch-
ing node search. If only individual nodes shall be excluded from punching the input PUNC no.
HEAD OFF is better (more clear).
The advantage of PUNC no. HEAD OFF is: this input can also be made in a separate TEDDY
taskinfrontofaSSDTaskdesignandwillbeusedthere(butnotSELE).PossibleSSDTEDDY
Task:
PROG BEMESS
HEAD
PUNC 16,317,712 HEAD OFF
END
Examples for SELE:
SELE (1 9999 1) 0 $ first switch off all nodes
SELE 14,253,402 1 $ take only these nodes
or:
SELE (1 999 1) 1 $ first switch on all user defined SOFIPLUS nodes
SELE 251,255 0 $ except these
$ (automatically created nodes have numbers > 1000)
or:
SELE TYPE 0 GRP 3,5 $ removes punching nodes
$ coming from GRP 3+5 (temporary supports)
3-66 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.23 S – Input of External Forces and Moments
Seealso: LC
S
Item Description Unit Default
NO Element number − 1
NO1 Additionalnumberusedfordistinctionofseveralinput − 0
records
MX Bending moment m-xx [kNm/m] 0.
MY Bending moment m-yy 1113 0.
MXY Bending moment m-xy 0.
VX Shear force v-x [kN/m] 0.
VY Shear force v-y 1112 0.
NX Membrane force n-xx [kN/m] 0.
NY Membrane force n-yy 1111 0.
NXY Membrane force n-xy 0.
For the input of external forces and moments the information which are saved in the database
maybeignoredpossibly. ThismeansthatanelementthicknesshastobeinputinGEOM.Only
anoldBaumanndesign(CTRLLAY0)isdone-nolayerdesign,nosheardesignisdone. Also
serviceability checks can not be made with extern forces S.
But you can achieve a complete design with manually forces with a little one quad system:
See example bemess.dat/english//special]design_of_external_forces.dat
SOFiSTiK2023 3-67BEMESS|InputDescription
3.24 EXPO – Export of the Design Parameters
EXPO
Item Description Unit Default
OPT reserved − -
TO Name of a file to write to Lt96 *
PASS Password of the CDB to be exported Lt16 -
With the record EXPO you may export the design parameters in the database to an input file
for BEMESS. This may be useful in special cases.
If the filename is not specified the data will be appended to the most recently defined file or a
file with the name project_BEX.DAT is generated.
3-68 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|BEMESS
3.25 ECHO – Control of Output
Seealso: NSTR,PUNC,LC,CTRL
ECHO
Item Description Unit Default
OPT A literal from the following list: LT FULL
PARA Design parameter
MAT Material (default=PARA)
REIN Reinforcement design results
NSTR Strains,stressrangeandconcretestressin
SLS
PUNC Punching checks
ECHO PUNC 4: WINGRAF plot of V-Ed
without bedding red. on foundations
RTAB Reinforcement compilation
DMOM Internalforcesofthedesign(ECHODMOM
has nothing to do with CTRL DMOM!)
STRE Linear Stress determination with CTRL
STRE
ELEM Outprint only for these elements
NODE Outprint only for these nodes
RVT switch for REVIT output (shorter PARA
lists)
FULL All above the options
VAL Value of output option −/LT *
- without input = default
Only elements with maximum results (with-
out nodes)
- element or node number for ELEM or
NODE
NO No output
YES Regular output, no plots
Only elements and nodes with maximum
results
FULL Extensive output, (all elements + nodes),
plots
EXTR Extreme output
Also all single loadcases and details on
concrete strain
The default is activated without an user input:
PARA FULL
PUNC YES (FULL for the maximum loaded point)
SOFiSTiK2023 3-69BEMESS|InputDescription
STRE YES
RTAB+DMOM NO
REIN+SIGS+NSTR only elements with maximum results
On input of single elements with ELEM or NODE (design test) ECHO REIN und ECHO NSTR
is set to EXTR.
Alternatively to ELEM you can also work with ECHO ELEM no, then all elements are
designed but the output only prints the selected elements. Then automatically an ex-
tended output is started, the stress plot is only done for the first element of the
ECHO ELEM list. To select a node please input ECHO NODE. See example be-
mess.dat/english/]bemess8_multi_layer_design.dat
In the stress range check with ECHO NSTR FULL only elements that require a reinforcement
increase are printed. ECHO NSTR EXTR generates the maximum stresses of all load cases
and elements. Better use WINGRAF to check the stress range.
3-70 SOFiSTiK2023