ELLA
Extended Live Load Analysis
SOFiSTiK | 2023ELLA
ExtendedLiveLoadAnalysis
ELLAManual,ServicePack2023-3Build88
Copyright©2023 bySOFiSTiKAG,Nuremberg,Germany.
SOFiSTiKAG
HQNuremberg OfficeGarching
Flataustraße14 Parkring2
90411Nürnberg 85748GarchingbeiMünchen
Germany Germany
T+49(0)91139901-0 T+49(0)89315878-0
F+49(0)911397904 F+49(0)89315878-23
info@sofistik.com
www.sofistik.com
Thismanualisprotectedbycopyrightlaws. Nopartofitmaybetranslated,copiedorreproduced,inanyformorby
anymeans,withoutwrittenpermissionfromSOFiSTiKAG.SOFiSTiKreservestherighttomodifyortorelease
neweditionsofthismanual.
Themanualandtheprogramhavebeenthoroughlycheckedforerrors. However,SOFiSTiKdoesnotclaimthat
eitheroneiscompletelyerrorfree. Errorsandomissionsarecorrectedassoonastheyaredetected.
Theuseroftheprogramissolelyresponsiblefortheapplications. Westronglyencouragetheusertotestthe
correctnessofallcalculationsatleastbyrandomsampling.
FrontCover
Volkstheater,Munich Photo:FlorianSchreiberContents|ELLA
Contents
Contents i
1 Task Description 1-1
2 Theoretical Principles 2-1
2.1 Bending Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.2 Unit Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.3 Load Introduction in Lanes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.4 Interpolation of the Influence Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-4
2.5 Transverse Influence Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-6
2.6 Evaluation of the Influence Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-7
2.6.1 Favourably and Unfavourably Performing Loads . . . . . . . . . 2-7
2.6.2 Unfavourable Load Position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-8
2.6.3 Loaded Length and Load Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-9
2.7 Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-10
3 Input Description 3-1
3.1 Input Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
3.2 Input Records. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-2
3.3 ECHO – Control of the Output Extent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-4
3.4 CTRL – Control Parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-5
3.5 Definition of the Lane Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-6
3.6 GAX – Geometry of an Axis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-7
3.7 LANE – Width of Traffic Lanes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-9
3.8 LSEL – Selection of a Defined Lane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-13
3.9 Calculation of Influence Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-15
3.10 CALC – Evaluation of Influence Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-16
3.11 LINF – Influence Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-18
3.12 APPL – Control of the Loading Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-19
3.13 SIZE – Graphic Representation of Influence Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-20
3.14 SHOW – Representation of Influence Lines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-22
3.15 ACT – Definition of an Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-23
3.16 LC – Train Load Loading Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-31
3.17 TRAI – Load Train Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-32
3.17.1 Impact Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-36
3.17.2 Centrifugal Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-37
3.17.3 Load Trains according to Eurocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-38
3.17.4 Load Trains SLW and LKW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-48
3.17.5 Load trains BS 5400, TMH7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-50
3.17.6 Heavy Load trains BS 5400, TMH7, IS 1227 . . . . . . . . . . . 3-52
3.17.7 Live Loads according to AASHTO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-53
SOFiSTiK2023 iELLA|Contents
3.17.8 Load trains according CAN/CSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-55
3.17.9 Load trains IRC 6-2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-56
3.17.10 Load trains of the Japan Road Association . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-57
3.17.11 Load trains AS 5100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-58
3.17.12 Swedish Load Trains (BRO 2004) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-59
3.17.13 French Load Trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-60
3.17.14 Railway train loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-62
3.17.15 Military NATO Load Trains (Stanag 2021) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-68
3.18 TRPL – Point Load of load train . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-69
3.19 TRBL – Block Load of Load Train . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-72
3.20 SAVE – Saving case for an evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-74
3.21 CASE – Evaluation Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-75
3.22 POSL – Position of the Load Trains for an evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-77
3.23 COMB – Intermediate Combination of Evaluations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-80
4 Output Description 4-1
4.1 Lane Geometry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
4.2 Influence Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
4.3 Load Trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
4.4 Superposition Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
4.5 Evaluation Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
4.6 Program Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-4
ii SOFiSTiK2023TaskDescription|ELLA
1 Task Description
ELLAisaprogramfortheanalysisandevaluationofimposedloadsthatactsonspatialbeamor
shellstructuresintheformofloadtrainswhichmovealongcertaintrafficlanes. Theenvelopes
of the scalar variables for the entire structure are usually the result. In the case of simple
statical systems and simple load cases a traditional analysis of the system can be faster for a
large number of imposed load cases under circumstances. The evaluation of influence lines
or influence surfaces becomes necessary for an accurate analysis of larger systems, as they
are usual particularly in the bridge construction. It is not so simple to determine either the
most unfavourable load position or the used parts of a load in order to maximize the certain
internal forces for important parts of the structure outside its midspan. In addition, different
load positions are critical for the different internal forces and moments. The evaluation of the
influence lines reduces the extent of the input very significantly.
Theentiresurfaceofastructureatwhichimposedloadsactgetsdividedintostraightorcurved
lanesofvariablewidth. Anyloadtrainscanbeassignedtoeachlane. Theycanmoveindepen-
dently or in relation to each other. The traffic lanes are defined with axes which may contain
circular segments or clothoids. The loading refers always to the lane axis. An influence line
is generated for a vertical loading along the lane’s axis for each lane as well as for a moment
loading about the same axis due to the eccentrical parts. Additional influence lines for brake
or centrifugal loading can be considered upon request.
The program evaluates influence lines only for corresponding traffic lanes even in the case of
plane structures. However, a satisfactory representation of the two-dimensional effects can be
achieved for the available element distribution by partitioning the structure into multiple lanes.
The influence surfaces can be either transferred from the database or determined as a rule
with a calculation with an own static module of the influence line program.
Inthesecondcase,however,allthesingleelementstiffnessesaswellasthestiffnessmatrixof
theentirestructuremustbeavailable. Thisrequiresthatatleastoneloadcasehasbeenanal-
ysed with the programs ASE or STAR2 with option CTRL SOLV 1 or 3, and the corresponding
data is still available. Load cases with settlement of support or non-linear load cases are not
suitable for this.
SOFiSTiK2023 1-1ELLA|TaskDescription
1-2 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|ELLA
2 Theoretical Principles
2.1 Bending Areas
Influencelinescanbecalculatedwithtwocompletelydifferentmethods. Thefirstmethoddeter-
minesthedeformations(e.g. bendingline)duetoanunitdeformationforthesearchedinternal
force (e.g. a break for a moment). The bending area is the result of a static analysis with an
appropriate program. A load case defines always one influence area. Corresponding areas
are own load cases in each case. This method should be preferred when only a few influence
areasorparticularvariablesaretobecalculated(e.g. supportreactions,deformationsorsums
of scalar variables).
When a large number of influence lines of the structure has to be calculated with this method,
an own load case will have to be analysed for each cross section and for each internal force.
This procedure exceeds usually the available CPU time and memory capacities of the static
programs.
2.2 Unit Loads
Thesecondmethodworksinoppositemanner. Aunitloadisdefinedateachposition(nodeor
member cross section). The analysis determines all the other corresponding internal forces.
The main advantage of this method is that the single loads do not have to be applied at every
loading location. The missing intermediate values can be calculated easily with an interpola-
tion, if the known discontinuities at loading location (break, jump) are considered additionally.
Therefore, the number of load cases to be analysed can be reduced significantly.
In the case of plane structures the discontinuity is defined by means of a singularity. This
singularity does not result from a finite element analysis in principal. However we have a
smooth approximate influence function which may be used to derive the principal problem of
precision in a Finite-Element-Analysis very clearly (see Hartmann/Katz - Structural Analysis
with Finite Elements, Springer). This should be considered particularly in the case of shear
forces!
2.3 Load Introduction in Lanes
The loaded traffic area is defined by lanes with a traffic band of constant width and residual
areas. Loads will be defined within a lane, but can move arbitrarily along the lane and in some
cases also across the traffic band.
Inordertoacceleratetheevaluation,theloadsaresimplifiedwithinalanebyaverticalloading
and a torsional moment due to the eccentric position of the vertical load. Thus the description
by means of an eccentric lane or an eccentric load is equivalent for single loads.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-1ELLA|TheoreticalPrinciples
Figure2.1: Eccentriclaneandeccentricload
Mostofthestandardroadloadingsareinternallypartitionedintoloadsattheleft-handsideand
at the right-hand side of the shear centre. The location of which is automatically determined
from the influence values for torsional and vertical loading.
Figure2.2: Partitionofthedistributedloadsattheshearcentre
In the case of two girders and articulated load distribution the result is the same, if the loading
is placed centrically at lane 1 or eccentric with respect to lane 2. The eccentricity moment
2-2 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|ELLA
offers the necessary correction for the distribution of the loading at the longitudinal girders:
Lane 1 Lane 2
Lane 1:
Lane 2:
Figure2.3: Distributiontwolongitudinalgirders
However, great differences are already available in this case for rigid load distribution. An
eccentricity should be then only relatively small. Here up to 20 percent deviations would result
in the distribution between the two variants.
In the case of three or more girders the results can be very different as the next two figures
show. It can be stated as a rule that both the load and the lane must be located in the same
span region in terms of the lateral behaviour of the structure.
DifferentresultsarealwaysobtainedinFEstructures,whenloadandlanearenotatthesame
or neighboring elements. The deviations of the results are negligible in the neighbouring ele-
ment, but they increase of course as the distance between lane and load increases. As the
loading of single moments for planar shell or slab structures may lead to further errors, eccen-
tricities of loads must not be used for these types of the structure, instead an evaluation with a
SOFiSTiK2023 2-3ELLA|TheoreticalPrinciples
transverse influence line should be used.
Figure2.4: Correctloaddistributionforthreelongitudinalgirders
moment M
load P
resulting force
Figure2.5: Wrongloaddistributionforthreelongitudinalgirders
2.4 Interpolation of the Influence Areas
When the lane axis does not coincide with the defined nodes, the values of the influence line
2-4 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|ELLA
must be interpolated. The program searches then for two series of nodes in the direct vicinity
of the lane and interpolates perpendicularly to its axis.
Figure2.6: Interpolationoftheinfluenceareas
The selection of a neighboring node series is trivial for plane structures. For girders, however,
it is in general a problem for the artificial intelligence. It is extremely difficult for a program to
develop the human ability of the general overview. Therefore, this part of the program can not
execute in a uniquely determined way. A specific constellation not being recognized correctly
can occur again and again. The user must take a proper action in such cases by defining a
sequence of nodes or beam elements.
For the interpolation perpendicularly to the lane axis a distinction must be done very exactly
between three variations that result from different types of the load distribution:
INT = 0 INT = 1 INT = 2
Single lane Articulated Rigid
load distribution load distribution
Figure2.7: Loaddistribution
In the first case (INT 0) an eccentrically placed loading generates directly a torsional moment.
The influence line of the shear force for the effect of the eccentric influence has no jump in the
loading location.
In the second case (INT 1) the load is replaced by two forces that act at the two girders.
The torsional moments result only as a secondary phenomenon due to the constraint of the
rotations. Theinfluencelinefortheeffectoftheeccentricitymayincludejumps. Thisisusually
the most accurate method for plane structures analysed with Mindlin elements.
In the third case (INT 2) torsional moments result additionally from the fixed constraint of the
deck slab.
Following the inverse principle of influence lines it is also possible to view the different meth-
SOFiSTiK2023 2-5ELLA|TheoreticalPrinciples
ods as different interpolation grades of the transverse influence line as shown in the following
picture:
INT 0 INT 1 INT 2
Figure2.8: InterpolationGrades
2.5 Transverse Influence Lines
For plate and shell structures this interpolation of the lane values may become insufficient as
local effects of the loads have to be neglected. Thus, the use of the types 3, 5, 7 or 9 will
create this number of load points transverse to the lane. The transverse influence line will the
be interpolated with a spline between these values.
Inafirststepanimmediateevaluationofthemaximumeffectsforauniformloadingandseveral
axle types with predefined distances of wheels is performed in the transverse direction.
Figure2.9: ImmediateEvaluationintransversedirection
• The values P are the sums of the influence values at the wheel positions for up to
three load directions (P = vertical, PT = transverse, PL = longitudinal)
• The value M is the moment of the vertical influence values at the wheel positions.
• Thegiveninfluencevaluesp+andp-aretheintegralsforauniformverticalloadwith
the influence values across the lane width with positive and negative contributions.
• The given influence values r+ and r- are the integrals for a uniform residual vertical
load with the influence values on the right and left side of the lane.
• The first row shows the values for the most important configuration of wheels, the
2-6 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|ELLA
following lines show the valueas of the alternate axles (here approx. 15% less)
• Theobtainedvalueswillthenbecomethevaluesofthelongitudinalinfluencelineat
this position for the second evaluation along the lane.
There are some inevitable inconsistencies to be accepted:
• If the applied load train is smaller than the lane width, the influence values for a
uniformloadingarenotapplicable. Thiscasewillbecheckedwithanerrormessage.
• If the applied load train has a different distance of the wheels, the influence values
will not match if the transverse influence line is not linear. Multiple wheel configura-
tions within a load train are possible. This case will be checked with a warning.
• All wheels are applied together, there is no possibility to split the wheels for differ-
ent signs of the influence line. If a load train is defined with single wheels, their
contribution is evaluated based on a central P and a M from the excentricity.
• It might be possible that the extreme load position is not the same for the maximum
verticaleffectandthemaximumtorsionaleffect. Thisisneglectedbyusingthemost
adverse effect of the forces in all cases, based on the fact that any moment will be
transferred via forces of the wheels
2.6 Evaluation of the Influence Lines
2.6.1 Favourably and Unfavourably Performing Loads
Since each load may use more than one influence line at the same time, a quick evaluation of
influence lines is possible only if some assumptions are made about the load positions. ELLA
uses also deductional loads, i.e. negative loads, which describe gaps within an uniform traffic
band.
Loads of the load trains are thus considered unfavourable, when a load in the positive gravity
direction(downwards)withthesameeccentricityatthecorrespondingpointoftheinfluenceline
wouldalsoactunfavourably. Loadsthatactatregionsoftheinfluencelinewithanoppositesign
are considered favourable. This classification decides about the appropriate dynamic factors,
the possible use of the reduction factors, and whether the load should be taken into account
at all. Horizontal loading will not be included in this decision. However all load directions are
consideredforthedeterminationofthemostunfavourableloadpositionandthefinalevaluation
of the results of cause.
In order to consider eccentricity effects (eg. torsional loading), the loads may be automatically
subdivided if the shear centre is within the width of the lane. However, despite all these fea-
tures the user should take care, that the real load situation may be mapped by the load train.
Sometimes either the lane axis must be displaced or a secondary lane must be added or the
loads must be given explicitly.
For the evaluation of horizontal loading by braking or wind one has to take care of some more
subtle effects. If for example the influence line for a bending moment is taken with respect to
the eccentric longitudinal force at the upper deck, we have areas with positive and negative
values:
Following remarks should be observed:
SOFiSTiK2023 2-7ELLA|TheoreticalPrinciples
Figure2.10: EvaluationofHorizontalLoading
• If the brake load is taken over the total length in the same direction, the contributions will
cancel mostly. This kind of loading should be defined as standard load case, but not within
ELLA.
• If the load train has a dedicated travelling direction, only those contributions will be taken
into account acting unfavourably, although the design code (e.g. Eurocode) may define
the load value by the total, but limited loading in the lane and an overall loaded length. A
modification of the load value depending on the loaded length will not occur.
• Iftheloadtrainisallowedtotravelinanydirection,allcontributionswillbesummedupwith
their unfavourable sign. Thus the areas with the wrong sign will either have traffic in the
oppositedirectionoraccelerationforcesareeffective. AlthoughtheEurocodespecifiesthis
possibility only for the total load value, this approach will also compensate for the missing
effect of the adoption of the load value to the loaded length from the remark above.
2.6.2 Unfavourable Load Position
Fortheloadtrainstherearecaseswheretheloadtrainshouldbeappliedintotalonlyorwhere
parts of the load train may be deactivated. This will be controlled by a factor for favorable
loading for every load element. Then the distinction has to be made between the cases of a
loadingwhichisalwayspresent(e.g. cranes)andthosewheretheloadmayleavethesystem.
But as the resulting forces and moments have to be superimposed with permanent loads, this
decision may be postponed until then.
The most unfavourable load position is sought with a three-stage method. In a first step some
typical load patterns are positioned at different locations perpendicular to the traffic axis. This
may be done with a transverse influence line (LSEL INT>2) or based on simple mechanics of
a lever.
Inasecondsteptheloadtrainisplacedatselectedpositionswhicheithertheprogramselects
itself or the user prescribes with POSL. Variable lengths or convoys of loading are estimated
separatelywithasimplemethod. Thelengthsofthepositiveloadsaresetalwaysequaltotheir
maximum value, whereas negative loads are placed in such a way that their influence value at
the end of the load is the largest possible.
In a third step the most unfavourable value of all analyzed positions keeps on being examined
for local extreme values. That means the load train positions and all lengths are varied until
the most unfavourable position is found.
A special hint should be given to the Culmann load position. For two adjacent loads the most
unfavourable moment is obtained when the larger force and the resultant of the two loads are
symmetrictothemidofthespan. Butthemaximummomentisthennotathemidofthespan!
2-8 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|ELLA
For the special case of two equal loads P with a distance  on a single span beam of length ,
the maximum moment is given by:
(cid:149)  (cid:152)2
M m =P·· 1− (2.1)
2·
2.6.3 Loaded Length and Load Values
For some load trains the load values are dependant on the loaded length. Problems might
occur if very short sections of an influence line will generate very high loadings and these will
become unfavourable compared to values of the total loaded length. ELLA provides differnet
methods With CTRL AGRL to cope with that variations:
AGRL -1 Lengthvalueswillbekeptseparately,eachspanistakenonitsown. Thisisthemos
unfavourable approach.
AGRL 0 Length values will be combined within the same lane, but the load value will be
increased if the most important span would be more unfavourably
AGRL 1 Length values will be combined within the same lane, the load value is dependant
only on the total length (Default)
AGRL 2 Length values will be combined over all lanes
In any case only full spans or sections of the influence lines will be considered.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-9ELLA|TheoreticalPrinciples
2.7 Limits
Some limits must be satisfied when using the program. The load direction of all load trains is
always in the direction of the gravity. The application of ELLA for plane frames or shear walls
provides so many ambiguities, that we do not support this feature currently.
coordinate system right-handed
maximum number of load cases 999999
maximum number of axis unlimited
maximum number of lanes per axis 99
maximum number of influence lines unlimited
Analysis time may become quite large. Thus the following points may be important:
• ECHO EXTR may create a really huge amount of print with high time requests.
• It is worth to select only those lanes with intended loadings.
• The influence lanes may be calculated only once, it is possibel to repeat an evaluation in a
separate input block.
• If only few influence lines are required, the analysis with unit dislocations may be faster
(see example ella1_threespan.dat)
• ECHO STAT prints the time of the individual steps.
The program uses a dynamic working memory which is used mainly for the storage of the
values needed for the influence lines. An equation for the necessary memory can not be
given, yet the in fact used size can be printed with ECHO STAT. Thus the amount of reserved
memory may be specified after PROG ELLA with a parameter Mnnn, where nnn is the size
of the memory in millions of 4-byte words. As a very high request will slow down the virtual
memory performance, the optimum value has to be found individually.
The program is executed mostly in a uniquely determined way. There are, however, two types
of problems for which a unique solution does not exist or can not be found by the program
under circumstances. These are:
• The algorithm for the selection of the nodes next to the lane It is to be expected that un-
expected results arise at irregularities (e.g. kinematic constraints, double defined beam
members etc.).
• Load trains with variable length In the case of load trains with loads of variable length the
whole problem may become very complex. One should use so few changeable lengths as
possible. Inadditiontheusershoulddefinefirstthelengthswhichhavethemostsignificant
effects. In the case of doubt it is better to define more evaluation cases with fixed load
lengths.
2-10 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3 Input Description
3.1 Input Language
The input is made in the CADINP language (see general manual SOFiSTiK: ’FEA / STRUC-
TURAL Installation and Basics’).
Thegeometricandstaticalmodelmusthavebeenalreadydefinedandstoredinthedatabase.
The geometric definitions of the lanes may be already available in the database.
The input is articulated in blocks which are decollated with the record END. Within every block
one can:
• calculate or take over influence lines at old or new defined lanes:.
GAX, LANE Geometric definition of a lane
LSEL Select a lane for influence line evaluation
LINF Get influence line from database
CALC, APPL Parameter for evaluation
• print or plot the calculated or stored influence lines
SIZE, SHOW Print and draw influence lines
• Define load trains
LC, TRAI, TRPL, TRBL
• evaluate the influence lines with different load trains
CASE,COMB Load cases and their combinations
POSL Position of load trains within the lanes
The influence lines and load positions remain stored in a separate database (.CDI) and are
available for further evaluations.
The program is ended, when an empty block (END/END) occurs.
Three categories of units are distinguished:
mm Fixed unit. Input is always required in the specified unit.
[mm] Explicit unit. Input defaults to the specified unit. Alternatively, an explicit as-
signment of a related unit is possible (eg. 2.5[m] ).
[mm] Implicit unit. Implicit units are categorised semantically and denoted by a cor-
1011
responding identity number (shown in green). Valid categories referring to the
unit ”length” are, for example, geodetic elevation, section length and thickness.
Thedefaultunitforeachcategoryisdefinedbythecurrentlyactive(designcode
specific) unit set. This input default can be overridden as described above. The
specified unit in square brackets corresponds to the default for unit set 5 (Eu-
rocodes, NORM UNIT 5).
SOFiSTiK2023 3-1ELLA|InputDescription
3.2 Input Records
The following input records are defined:
Record Items
ECHO TYPE VAL
CTRL OPT VAL
GAX NO S X Y Z R A
NX NY NZ TYPE TITL
LANE NO TYPE SA SE WR WL YCA
YCE YRA YLA YRE YLE L
LSEL NO INT DX DY DZ RSEL RSEQ
LSEL LSEQ
CALC TYPE LMAX LMIN FROM TO DELT SYST
LINF T1 L1 T2 L2 T3 L3 T4
L4 T5 L5 T6 L6 TITL
APPL TYPE TGEN
SIZE TYPE SC W H MARG FORM HDIV
C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7
SHOW SNO TYPE NO X ETYP DSV YMAX
ACT TYPE GAMU GAMF PSI0 PSI1 PSI2 PS1S
PART SUP TITL
LC NO PSI0 PSI1 PSI2 PS1S GAMU GAMF
TITL
TRAI TYPE P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6
P7 P8 P9 PFAC WIDT PHI
PHI2 PHIS PHI4 V FUGA XCON DIR
DIRT
TRPL P PB PW PF PFAC DIST A
DPOS DMIN DMAX Y Y2 HW ZW
HF PHI B
TRBL P PB PW PF PFAC DIST A
L LMAX LDEL Y Y2 HW ZW
HF PHI B
SAVE LCB TYPE TITL
CASE NO GRP
POSL NO TRAI FACT
OPT SMIN SMAX DEL YEX V P
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-2 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Record Items
SYNC PLON PTRA FUGA IMPA EXCE EXTR
COMB V P SYNC
TYPE L1 F1 L2 F2 L3 F3
L4 F4 L5 F5 L6 F6
L7 F7 L8 F8 L9 F9
L10 F10
The records HEAD, END and PAGE are described in the general manual SOFiSTiK: ’FEA /
STRUCTURAL Installation and Basics’.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-3ELLA|InputDescription
3.3 ECHO – Control of the Output Extent
Seealso: LANE,LINF,CALC,TRAI
ECHO
Item Description Unit Default
OPT A literal from the following list: LT FULL
LANE Lane geometry
IL Influence lines
LOAD Load trains
EVAL Evaluation
LPOS Load positions
RES Results
FULL All the above options
STAT CPU time and memory allocation
VAL Extent of the output LT FULL
OFF no calculation, no output
NO no output
YES regular output
FULL extensive output
EXTR extreme output
The record name ECHO must be input for every record so that the options are not confused
with other records with identical names. The volume of printed data is also controlled with the
record SHOW.
With ECHO IL the influence lines will be printed, in general as pictures, but with option EXTR
alsoastext. ThesmallinfluencelinesintransversedirectionwillbeshownwiththeOption+4.
Without a SHOW selection the volume of pictures may become quite large.
With the option LPOS FULL the actual load positions of all evaluations will be saved to the
database and the graphical visualization of the influence lines will include the loading and will
be repeated for all evaluation cases.
ECHO EVAL YES prints only the generated load cases for the case of ECHO RES NO. For
the load train position ECHO EVAL FULL is needed and for the detailed statistical data ECHO
EVAL EXTR.
ECHO RES EXTR prints the intermediate results of all cases.
3-4 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.4 CTRL – Control Parameter
Seealso: APPL,CALC
CTRL
Item Description Unit Default
OPT A literal from the following list: LT !
SECT Evaluation of beam sections
VAL Value of Option − *
V2 reserved for additional option − -
V3 reserved for additional option − -
V4 reserved for additional option − -
V5 reserved for additional option − -
V6 reserved for additional option − -
WithCTRLSECTonecanobtainevaluationsonlyatcertainbeamsections. Theinputoptions
are:
CTRL SECT 0 only section with print-flag (see program SOFiMSHA record BSEC)
CTRL SECT 1 all beam sections (default)
With CTRL AGRL one can select how ELLA should cope with the aggregation of loaded
lengths. The load values as well as the impact factors may depend on those values.
CTRL AGRL -1 Length values will be kept separately, each span is taken on its own.
CTRL AGRL 0 Length values will be combined within the same lane, but the load
value will be increased if the most important span would be more un-
favourably
CTRL AGRL 1 Lengthvalueswillbecombinedwithinthesamelane,theloadvalueis
dependant only on the total length (Default)
CTRL AGRL 2 Length values will be combined over all lanes
It has to be pointed out, that option -1 will be not be general applicable in case of elastic
supports, where strong discontinuities in the results may be obtained and thus is not a me-
chanically sound procedure.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-5ELLA|InputDescription
3.5 Definition of the Lane Geometry
Thebaseofthemovingloadprocessisalanegeometry,describedintheplanviewbystraight,
circular or clothoid segments and in the elevation as straight or quadratic parabola. This can
be taken from the database as defined by SOFiMSHC or SOFILOAD or explicitly input with
the record GAX. Each axis may have up to nine separate lanes with the sub numbers 1 to 9
definedviaLANE.Forthedynamicimpactcoefficientsaneffectivelengthmaybespecifiedand
the extra width of the traffic area may be defined.
A lane axis already stored in the database (by SOFiMSHC or SOFiLOAD or ELLA) can be
activated with the record LSEL.
Each lane has two coordinate systems. There is a local system (x) at the lane axis for real
distances. However,theinputsforthepositionsalongthelanesareenteredinaglobalsystem
of stations (s) which defines an alignment of the lanes to each other.
Figure3.1: Laneaxisdefinition
3-6 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.6 GAX – Geometry of an Axis
Seealso: Load-train,LANE
GAX
Item Description Unit Default
NO Axis identifier LT4 A1
S Total arc length (station) − 0
X Real world coordinates of point [m] 0
1001
Y [m] 0
1001
Z [m] 0
1001
R Radius of the lane axis [m] -
1001
A Transition curve R·L=A2 [m] -
1001
NX Direction vector for curves in 3D − *
NY not to be used for standard alignments − *
NZ − *
TYPE Type of axis LT AXIS
AXIS = general axis
LANE = traffic lane
BGEO = bridge geometry line
TITL Designation of lane LT32 -
A general geometric axis with all details may be now defined in SOFIMSHC. For SOFiLOAD /
ELLA / TENDON only a simplified definition is provided as follows.
• Definition with a length resp. station in the plan view For the first record of an axis the
start point (X,Y,Z) and the start direction (NX,NY,NZ), the length S of the first segment and
optional curvature and clothoidal parameter is specified. All consecutive records contain
only the next S-value and the curvature parameters.
Ifaradiusisdefined,atransitionelementfromthelastradiustothecurrentvalueisgener-
ated. PositivevaluesforRcauseacurvaturetotheright-handside,whilstnegativevaluesa
curvature to the left-hand side. If A is defined, a clothoidal spiral transition curve is created
where the curvature increases for the positive values of A and decreases for the negative
values. If the radius R is not given it will be calculated automatically based on the length, if
it is given together with A the curvature of the start point will be calculated instead. Basket
arches with piecewice constant curvatures may be defined with A=0.0 and the selected
radius.
GAX 'B1' S 8.0 A 10 X -1.000 NX 1.0 TITL 'SPIRAL AND CIRCLE'
S 16.0
GAX 'B2' S 8.0 R 25.0 A 0.0 Y -1.000 NY 1.0 TITL 'THREE CENTER CURVE'
SOFiSTiK2023 3-7ELLA|InputDescription
S 16.0 R 14.0 A 0.0
Figure3.2: Laneaxis
• Definition about 3D points at a curve The coordinates have to be input for all records. The
given direction (NX,NY,NZ) is the local z-axis and thus a defined circular arc turns around
this vector.
GAX A1-X S 0.0 X -1.000 TITL 'CENTER GEOMETRY'
S 16.0 X 30.000 R 150.0 NZ 1.0
The described elements will be automatically adopted from WinGRAF as dynamic axis. A
graphical check is recommended with the programs WING or WinGRAF.
The options to define the elevation or cross falls are now only available in SOFiMSHC.
3-8 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.7 LANE – Width of Traffic Lanes
Seealso: Load-train,GAX
LANE
Item Description Unit Default
NO Lane number (lane_ident.nummer) LT *
e.g. A1.3 = third lane of axis A1
lane_ident only = all/total lanes
TYPE Predefined type (see remarks) LT *
WR Ordinate of right curbstone [m] -
1001
WL Ordinate of left curbstone [m] -WR
1001
SA Coordinate along lane axis for start − !
SE Coordinate along lane axis for end − !
YCA Offset of centre of lane at start (SA) [m] *
1001
YCE Offset of centre of lane at the end (SE) [m] YCA
1001
YRA Right value at start (SA) [m] *
1001
YLA Left value at start (SA) [m] *
1001
YRE Right value at end (SE) [m] YRA
1001
YLE Left value at end (SE) [m] YLA
1001
L Effectivelengthofsegmentforimpactcoefficientsand [m] *
1001
loaded length dependencies
CONT add to last segment
HSA Height of deck or rail above lane at SA [m] 0.0
1001
HSE Height of deck or rail above lane at SE [m] HSA
1001
INCA Cross fall dz/dy or Δh[mm] at SA [mm] 0.0
INCE Cross fall dz/dy or Δh[mm] at SE [mm] INCA
HEFF Effective height of rail and sleeper [m] -
1001
BEFF Effective length of sleeper [m] -
1001
DEFF Effective width of sleeper [m] -
1001
INCD Spread angle for stresses − 0.25
ASL Distance between mounting points [m] -
1001
WREF Gauge to convert inclinations [m] 1.435
1001
The total loading area will be subdivided in up to 99 individual traffic lanes relative to a given
geometrical axis. These may be created automatically by a predefined standard section or
with explicit coordinates. One may subdivide each segment with different widths and dynamic
impact factors. All lanes have to be defined together to an existing axis, any new definition will
delete all previously defined lane definitions.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-9ELLA|InputDescription
Figure3.3: Singlelaneloadedandresidualarea
The width of the lane is defined through the left and the right boundaries. The lane can be
widened or narrowed by different input data at different stations. If the lane edges happen to
intersect the lane, this should be defined only at distinct points to allow for correct treating of
torsional loading.
The width of the load train may be less than those of the lane. In that case additional basic
areas are established loaded by a constant load specified with the load train. If the load train
is larger than the lane width, reductions of the applied loading are possible.
The lane 0 has to be defined always, for the following procedures two cases have to be distin-
guished:
• There is only lane 0, the width of the moving loading is defined only by the load train. Only
then, the eccentricities of the load train are applied absolutely for all lanes.
• There are other lanes within the curb stone limits. Then lane 0 defines the total extend of
thetrafficloadincludingpathways. Thewidthofthemovingloadisthemaximumextendof
the other lanes.
Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó
AXIS.1
T 101 ÓÓ Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó ÓÓ Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó ÓÓ Ó
Y −4.00 −2.00 0.00 2.00 4.00 m
M 1 : 70
Figure3.4: Twolanesloadedandresidualarea
Default constant sections are available via literals as follows. If such type (without blank
spaces) is given at the main lane, secondary lanes will be automatically created:
RQ7.5, RQ9.5, RQ10.5, RQ15.5,
RQ20, RQ26, RQ29.5
RQ33, RQ35.5 Setting total width automatically
For the following types the definition of the curbstone coordinates is always required, which is
constant along the total lane.
3-10 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
EN EN 1991-2 / DIN-Fachbericht 101
BS even lanes according BS resp. BD 37-01
TMH7 even lanes according TMH7
CAN even lanes according Canadian Standards
IRC even lanes according Indian road congress
JRA Main and secondary lanes (Japan road congress)
AS Main and secondary lanes (Australian AS 5100)
If the lanes have all the same width or the number of lanes is exceeding 6, the lanes starting
withno. 1willbealignedfromtherightedge(positivey-values). Ifthisisnotthecaselane1is
always the central lane in the mid of the total traffic area, more lanes with numbers 2 to 7 will
be created on alternating sides aside to lane 1.
In all cases right adjusted lanes starting with number 10 and left adjusted lanes starting with
number 20 will be available. However they will be created as own elements only if the second
case is given and the eccentricity is larger than 0.30 m.
For TMH7 lanes 11,12,13 resp. 19,18,17 with extreme eccentricity will be created.
Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó
AXIS.11 AXIS.10
T 102 T 101 Ó ÓÓ Ó ÓÓ Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó ÓÓ Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó ÓÓ Ó
Y −4.00 −2.00 0.00 2.00 4.00 m
M 1 : 70
Figure3.5: Twolanesadjustedtotherightloadedandresidualarea
Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó
AXIS.20 AXIS.21
T 101 T 102 ÓÓ Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó ÓÓ Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó ÓÓ Ó Ó ÓÓ Ó
Y −4.00 −2.00 0.00 2.00 4.00 m
M 1 : 70
Figure3.6: Twolanesadjustedtotheleftloadedandresidualarea
Residualareasaretheareasbetweentheedgesdefinedbythewidthoftheloadtrainandthe
edges of the lane itself. The pathways are thus only included in lane 0. Gaps between the
lanes are NOT treated as residual loading areas.
For the loading of the lane in SOFiLOAD it will be subdivided in the longitudinal direction
into segments (e.g. each span). If several lane-definitions should be combined to one single
segment, the definition of L is only possible for the first of the definitions, while specifying for
all the others the literal CONT at this position.
For railway bridges there are detailed tables available within EN 1991-2 or DIN FB 101 how
to select the governing length. Further there are detailed descriptions how to calculate the
SOFiSTiK2023 3-11ELLA|InputDescription
effective pressures below the ballast. For the latter the input values HEFF to ASL are needed,
however applicable and definable in SOFiLOAD only.
+ INC
s
BEFF HEFF HS
INCD
INCD
y
YL YR
z
Figure3.7: Ballastandsleepers
TheheightHEFFofthetracksorroadabovethelaneandthecrossfallINCA/INCEofthelane
will create additional moments within SOFILOAD and ELLA.
3-12 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.8 LSEL – Selection of a Defined Lane
Seealso: LaneGeometry,GAX,LANE,LSEL
LSEL
Item Description Unit Default
NO Lane identifier t8 !
INT Load distribution (see chapter 2) − 1
0 Single lane
1 Articulated distribution
2 Rigid distribution
3,5,7,9 Transverse infl. line QUAD
DX Maximum longitudinal distance or direction deviation [m] 99
1001
DY Influence width of the lane [m] 99
1001
DZ Influence height of the lane [m] 99
1001
RSEL Explicit centric/right-hand side nodes LT EDGE
EDGE by nodal sequence RSEQ
SZUG by continuous beam RSEQ
GRP by beams of group RSEQ
QGRP QUADs of group RSEQ
RSEQ Selection number for RSEL − -
LSEL Explicit left-hand side nodes LT (RSEL)
EDGE by nodal sequence LSEQ
SZUG by continuous beam LSEQ
GRP by beams of group LSEQ
QGRP QUADs of group LSEQ
LSEQ Selection number for LSEL −/Lt -
only for INT>2 (transverse evaluation):
TRAI Load case of a train for evaluation − -
B Width of the traffic band in transverse direction [m] 3.0
1001
BWH Distance of wheels in transverse direction [m] 2.0
1001
YMAX overwrite maximum eccentricity from TRAI [m] +YEX
1001
YMIN overwrite minimum eccentricity from TRAI [m] -YEX
1001
An already defined lane gets activated for evaluation with the record LSEL. At NO one has to
specifytheaxisidentifier(4chars)optionallyappendedbyadotandadigitforthelanenumber
(e.g. A1.3 but also with wild cards like A1.? or A1.1?). Without a lane number all lanes of that
axis are selected, which is not always a good choice to minimize analysis time. At the same
time parameters can be specified for the selection of the neighbouring nodes.
LaneswhicharedefinedwiththerecordGAXinthesameblockareselectedautomaticallywith
the standard values for DX, DY and DZ. A special feature can be achieved with an input of a
SOFiSTiK2023 3-13ELLA|InputDescription
negativevalueforINT.Inthiscaseallgeometricparametersandinfluencelinesaredeletedfor
this lane.
Iftheuserdoesnotdefineanexplicitsequenceofneighboringnodes,Ellawilltryinafirststep
to look for all nodes which are adjacent to the lane and tries to link them to one (INT 0) or two
(INT 1,2) nodal sequences.
For this search DY and DZ describe a region in which the corresponding nodes must be situ-
ated. DY is measured in this case at the right-hand side and at the left-hand side of the lane.
A value of about 90 percent of the distance between the main girders is a sound definition.
TheparameterDZdefinesthelimitsoftheregionunderthelanewhichistobeexamined. This
is for example necessary for three-dimensional structures at which parts of this structure lie
sometimes beneath the lane. Nodes above the lane axis are never considered.
ForINT>2DXspecifiesamaximumdistanceoftheloadpointsalongtheaxis. Whilethedefault
istousealoadpointateveryedgecrossingthelane,asmallervaluewillinsertadditionalpoints
between.
For INT 0 to 2 the parameter DX specifies, how large the angle between the lane axis and
an edge of the nodal sequence is accepted. An input is necessary, if transverse girders and
longitudinal girders have similar angles of intersection to the lane. If the node sequences may
intersect the lane, DX has to be input with a negative value.
Figure3.8: Nodeselectionforalane
If ELLA is not able to find suitable sequences of nodes, then it is possible to specify
two sequences explicitly by boundary or beam elements containing the desired nodes with
RSEL/RSEQ and LSEL/LSEQ.
Forplatesandshellsstructuresitisrecommendedtomakeanevaluationoftheinfluencearea
in transverse direction before establishing the longitudinal influence values. With types 3,5,7
and 9 these numbers of load points in transverse direction will be examined based on the
existing and selected QUAD elements.
QUAD elements are searched only based on the plan view. If a secondary group or a range
of primary groups is specified, no further checks about the elevation will be made. However
if no such definitions are given, only those QUAD elements will be considered situated with a
maximumofDZbelowtheloadingorwheretheloadingiswithintheelement. Thusitisstrongly
3-14 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
recommended to use a group definition to specify the traffic area properly. One secondary
group or a range of primary groups may be specified.
For the evaluation the transverse width of the traffic lane B, the distance of the wheels BWH
and the minimum and maximum eccentricities (YMIN,YMAX) are required. For the evaluation
in the longitudinal direction these values may not be changed any more. Thus the width of the
train has to match in all cases. If the wheel distances of the train do not match, deviations are
possible, which are flagged by a warning message.
Thus, it is strongly recommended to use a specific loadtrain with TRAI instead of those explict
values, allowing to select all requested values directly. Loadtrain LM3 contains also the wheel
spacingsofLM1,butnotinverse. ForspecialcasesaUSERtrainmaybeused,containingjust
all possible wheel spacings.
A graphical control may be obtained with ECHO EL +4.
3.9 Calculation of Influence Areas
Influence areas are calculated from unit load cases, when the record CALC is input. In every
case all the influence areas are produced for the corresponding internal forces. The record
CALC specifies for which elements and for which scalar variables the evaluation of the influ-
ence area will be performed.
For each extreme value of any scalar variable a load case can be generated and stored in the
database. The corresponding values of the rest of the internal forces are calculated automati-
cally too.
As an alternate way one may readinfluence lines or areaswhich were stored asload cases in
thedatabasewiththeinputoptionLINF.Thevaluesaretheninterpolatedtothedefinedlanes.
The results, however, do not get stored in the database.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-15ELLA|InputDescription
3.10 CALC – Evaluation of Influence Areas
Seealso: CalculationofInfluenceAreas,APPL,CTRL,CASE
CALC
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Scalarvariableforwhichtheinfluencelinesshouldbe LT -
evaluated
LMAX Load case number for the maximum − *
0 no evaluation
LMIN Load case number for the minimum − *
0 no evaluation
FROM Smallest element number −/Lt4 1
TO Largest element number −/Lt4 FROM
INC Increment of the element numbers − 1
SYST Subsystem for the analysis LT *
SPAC / GIRD
PHI Impactfactororcharacteristiclengthforimpactfactor − *
if given with a length unit
With CALC the elements will be selected for which the influence lines will be established. The
parametersspecifiedwithLSELwillbeappliedforthiscalculation. WithoutanyCALCdefinition
the last influence lines in file projectname.CDI will be reused.
If no input occurred for FROM, TO and DELT, all elements of the structure will be selected.
Multiple overlapping definitions are possible, the latest positive definition is valid. Instead of
the element numbers a group may be selected via or FROM ’GRP’ group.
The parameter SYST can define a reduced influence line evaluation. This may result in a
significant reduction of the CPU time and the memory requirement e.g. in the case of girders,
if a three-dimensional model was defined due to the prestress and the temperature, while the
imposed loads are acting only at a two-dimensional girder. The influence lines for the axial
forceaswellasforthetransversebendingarenotcalculatedorevaluatedwiththeinputSYST
GIRD.
List of the Scalar Variables
1. Beam Elements
N, VY, VZ, MT, MY, MZ, MB, MT2 Forces and moments
2. Truss, Cable and Spring Elements
TRUS Axial forces in truss elements
CABL Cable forces
3-16 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
P, M Spring force, spring moment
PTX, PTY, PTZ Transverse spring force component (PT is not directly
available, as it is nonlinear)
3. Shell, disk and plate elements
MXX, MYY, MXY Bending moments
VXX, VYY Shear forces
NXX, NYY, NXY Membrane forces
4. Nodes
UX, UY, UZ global displacements
PHIX, PHIY, PHIZ global rotations
5. Result sets
Result sets defined in SOFIMSHA will be selected with TYPE RSET:xxxxx, where
xxxxx is either the ID of the item within a set to be evaluated or a number if the x-th
item of all result sets should be evaluated. Supported are all forces and moments of
beam,trussandcableelements,forcesandstressesinthecenterofQUADandBRIC
elementsandnodaldisplacements,supportforcesandspringforces(butnotresultant
PT) Also any formula expressions within a result set definition will inihbit to select this
item as an influence line for ELLA.
AtFROMandTOtheidentsoftheresultsetsmaybespecifiedinlexicalorder(FROM
may also contain wildcards, e.g. "SU*") .
The evaluation of the influence lines for nodal support forces is possible by an import of a
deflection area caused from a nodal displacement, as force of a supporting spring or via the
result sets.
Theevaluationoftheinfluencelinesforpileelementsdoesnotincludetheeffectofthebedding,
thus only the results at the nodes are correct.
The application of ELLA for plane frames or shear walls provides so many possibilities
for miss-understandings, that we do not support this feature.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-17ELLA|InputDescription
3.11 LINF – Influence Lines
Seealso: CalculationofInfluenceAreas,LANE,ECHO,SHOW
LINF
Item Description Unit Default
T1 Type of the first influence line LT MAMI
L1 Load case number first influence line − -
T2 Type of the second influence line LT MAMI
L2 Load case number second influence line − -
T3 Type of the third influence line LT MAMI
L3 Load case number third influence line − -
T4 Type of the fourth influence line LT MAMI
L4 Load case number fourth influence line − -
T5 Type of the fifth influence line LT MAMI
L5 Load case number fifth influence line − -
T6 Type of the sixth influence line LT MAMI
L6 Load case number sixth influence line − -
PHI Impactfactororcharacteristiclengthforimpactfactor − *
if given with a length unit
TITL Title of the influence line LT24 *
Influence lines or areas which were stored as load cases can be taken over for the evaluation
along the defined lane axis. However, results are only printed and do not get stored in the
database.
Up to six corresponding influence lines can be defined together.
For type T1 to T6 one can enter:
MAMI = Evaluation for minimum and maximum
MAX = Evaluation for maximum
MIN = Evaluation for minimum
ACC = Evaluation only as corresponding line
Positive load case numbers are processed with the first set of impact factors (bending), while
negative load case numbers use the second set (shear).
3-18 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.12 APPL – Control of the Loading Location
Seealso: CalculationofInfluenceAreas,CALC,CTRL
APPL
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Direction of the unit forces LT STAN
MONO Only centric vertical loading
STAN Only vertical loading
TRAV Additionally tranverse loading
FULL Additionally longitudinal loading
TGEN Accuracy of the cross section jumps − 0.
The CPU time for obtaining the influence lines can be reduced by using the default value of
APPL. The options TRAV and FULL are only useful for three-dimensional systems with the
corresponding loads.
TheitemTGENspecifiesatwhichcrosssectionswithinabeamelementtheadditionalloading
locations are defined. A loading location is inserted, when the difference of the reciprocal
stiffness of two neighbouring cross sections is larger than a multiple of TGEN.
(cid:12) 1 1 (cid:12) 1
(cid:12) (cid:12) − (cid:12) (cid:12) > TGEN· (3.1)
(cid:12)E  E +1(cid:12) E 
The input of TGEN is recommended for structures with many similar cross sections, because
the CPU time and the memory allocation are reduced then significantly. For instance, TGEN
1.E10 suppresses the insertion of any loading locations at internal beam sections.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-19ELLA|InputDescription
3.13 SIZE – Graphic Representation of Influence Lines
Seealso: SHOW,ECHO
SIZE
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Paper size − -lp
Positive value Landscape format
Negative value Portrait format
SC Scale − *
0 format filling
W Paper width cm -
H Paper height cm -
MARG Draws a border LT FULL
OFF does not draw a border
NO draws only an inner border
YES release of an additional border
FULL draws an additional border around the
sheet
FORM Form of the border LT ZTVK
STAN Standard frame
ZTVK ZTVK-88 frame
URS URSULA definition
HDIV Number of the representations per sheet − *
C1 Pen number for vertical influence lines − 1000
C2 Pen number for torsional influence lines − 1001
C3 Pen number for longitudinal influence lines − 1002
C4 Pen number for transverse influence lines − 1003
C5 Pen number for positive uniform loadings − 0
C6 Pen number for negative uniform loadings − 0
C7 Pen number reserved − -
C8 Pen number for loadings − 2001
C9 Fill area number for loadings − 2235
Graphic representations are only produced, when the record SIZE is input. If a pen number is
defined negatively, the corresponding line type does not get plotted. Coding of lines see GPLI
ThelinestobeplottedareprescribedwiththeinputoftherecordSHOW.WithoutECHOLPOS
only the influence lines will be shown, with ECHO LPOS the actual load position will be also
visualized, which will need more pictures in general.
Theitemcausesasubdivisionofthesheetintosomestrips,sothatthecorrespondinginfluence
lines can be plotted at the same drawing. Positive values draw the lane axis along the paper
3-20 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
width and subdivide the paper height; negative values have a contrary effect. The default is
that three lines get plotted parallel to the largest dimension of the paper.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-21ELLA|InputDescription
3.14 SHOW – Representation of Influence Lines
Seealso: SIZE,ECHO,LINF
SHOW
Item Description Unit Default
SNO Lane number − 0
0 all
lit4 all lanes of axis ’lit4’
lit4.n only lane n of axis ’lit4’
TYPE Influence location LT ALL
ALL All types
LINF explicit bending areas (LINF)
BEAM Beam elements
TRUS Truss elements
CABL Cable elements
SPRI Spring elements
QUAD Plane elements
NO Element or first LINF-case number − 0
no input all
X X value for beam elements − -
no input all beams
ETYP Type of the influence lines LT ALL
EXTR Lines only for extreme values
ALL Also the corresponding lines
DSV Distance of the output values − *
YMAX minimum value to scale the line − 1.E-6
With SHOW the lines which should be printed (record ECHO IL) and / or plotted (record SIZE)
are selected. The item DSV controls the distance between marked positions in the output.
Available values are shown then at least in this distance. However, extreme values are output
additionally in all cases. There will be up to four lines for three force components and the
torsional moment. The presentation may be changed with record SIZE.
3-22 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.15 ACT – Definition of an Action
Seealso: ACT,LC
ACT
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Designation of action LT4 !
GAMU Unfavourable partial safety factor − *
GAMF Favourable partial safety factor − *
PSI0 Combination coefficient rare − *
PSI1 Combination coefficient frequent − *
PSI2 Combination coefficient quasi-permanent − *
PS1S Combination coefficient infrequent − *
GAMA Partial safety factor accidental − *
PART Partition to which the action belongs: LT *
G permanent
P prestress
Q variable action
Q_1 variable action load group 1
...
Q_99 variable action load group 99
A accidental action
E seismic action
SUP Default superposition of the load cases within the ac- LT *
tion:
PERM permanent with unique factor
PERC permanent with individual factors
COND conditional
EXCL mutually exclusive within category
EXEX mutually exclusive within action
UNSI COND with unfavourable sign
USEX EXCL with unfavourable sign
ALEX permanent but exclusive within action
TITL Designation of action LT24 *
As type of the action one may use any literal with up to 4 characters, however some combina-
tions are reservedfor special purpose. Theyare defined in the corresponding INI-files and will
followthedesignationoftheselecteddesigncodeascloseaspossible. Anoverviewisgivenin
the table below. Furthermore, it is possible to subdivide each action with up to two characters
in categories, designated with a character from A to Z, each having distinguished combination
coefficients or partial safety factors. The category will be appended with an underscore to the
name of the action.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-23ELLA|InputDescription
• Eachcategoryhasitsowncombinationvaluesanditsownloadcasesandadefaultsuper-
position rule within the action category.
• Each action comprehends all its categories, i.e. one may select either a sub category on
its own or all categories by the generic name of the category. (Q selects all Q_?)
INI-File/ EC-Defaults
action G
loadcase
loadcase
action Q
action Q_A
loadcase
loadcase
action Q_B
loadcase
loadcase
Figure3.9: Structureoftheactions,theircategoriesandtheirloadcases
ForexamplethereareforroadbridgesinEN1990fortheuniformlifeloadUDLandthemovable
doubleaxledifferentcombinationcoefficients. Forsimplecasesonewilldefinealoadcasefor
everyspanoftypeL_U(UDL),tobesuperimposedconditionally,whilethediscreteloadcases
of different load positions of the double axle will be defined as type L_T and exclude each
other. All load cases however will be applied together as leading variable action.
Finally any individual load case may have its own combination factors assigned in SOFiLOAD.
(seeLC).ThisshouldbeavoidedhoweverandadefinitionofcombinationcoefficientsinMAX-
IMA is then at least ambiguous and of little use therefore.
Normal Add. Spec. Remark
− for LC only: not assigned to an action
NONE
Gg ZGg SGq dead load (G + G_1 + G_2)
3-24 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Normal Add. Spec. Remark
G_1g Z1g S1q primary dead load
G_2g Z2g S2q secondary dead load
Pg ZPg SPq Prestress (for old DIN use V !)
Cg ZCg SCq Creep and shrinkage
Qq ZQ SQ variable load
L ZL SL life load (L in analog mode L_T (TS), ZL in analog mode L_U
(UDL))
W ZW SW Wind (use ZW for Bridges)
Sq ZS SS Snow (use ZS for Bridges)
Rg ZR SR Earth pressure, Water Pressure
Fq ZF SF Settlements (ZF = expected, SF = possible)
T ZT ST Temperature
A ZA SA Accidental
B ZB SB Construction, Maintenance
(ZB = resistance of bearings, SB = Exchange of bearings)
E ZE SE Seismic (ZE = Service, SE = Design)
g = Load case is permanent (always added)
q = Load case is conditional (added if unfavourable)
 = Load cases are conditional excluding each other
The actions indicated in the table are used only as preset action, provided that they are avail-
able in the INI-file of the selected design code.
The entries within one row with preceding Z for additional loading and S for special loading
may be treated in AQB as belonging to the same action.
For the seiesmic action there is in EN 1998 an importance factor γ  depending on the impor-
tance class to be selected by the user explicitly:
Class factor Description
I 1.4 Buildings whose integrity during earthquakes is of vital importance for civil
protection, e.g. hospitals, fire stations, power plants, etc.
II 1.2 Buildings whose seismic resistance is of importance in view of the conse-
quences associated with a collapse, e.g. schools, assembly halls, cultural
institutions etc.
III 1.0 Ordinary buildings, not belonging to the other categories
IV 0.8 Buildings of minor importance for public safety, e.g. agricultural buildings,
etc.
In principal every action may be subdivided by categories. For some action types (Q, L or
S) the values from EN 1990 (resp. DIN 1055-100, Table A2 or other deviations) are already
available as follows:
SOFiSTiK2023 3-25ELLA|InputDescription
Action ψ 0 ψ 1 ψ 2
Q: Payload for buildings [0.70] [0.50] [0.30]
- Q_A Housing [0.70] [0.50] [0.30]
- Q_B Offices [0.70] [0.50] [0.30]
- Q_C Assembly rooms [0.70] [0.70] [0.60]
- Q_D Sales rooms [0.70] [0.70] [0.60]
- Q_E Storage rooms [1.00] [0.90] [0.80]
Live load for buildings
- Q_F truck load <30kN [0.70] [0.70] [0.60]
- Q_G 30kN< truck load <160kN [0.70] [0.50] [0.30]
- Q_H Roofs [0.00] [0.00] [0.00]
L: Live loads according EN 1990
- L_T, Tandem Axle of LM 1 (γ=1.35) [0.75] [0.75] [0.00]
GR_T
- L_U, UDL loading of LM 1 (γ=1.35) [0.40] [0.40] [0.00]
GR_U
- L_C Load model UIC 71 (γ=1.45) [0.80] [0.80] [0.00]
- L_D Load model SW/0 (γ=1.45 [0.80] [0.80] [0.00]
- L_E Load model SW/2 (γ=1.20) [0.00] [1.00] [0.00]
Live load for buildings
- L_F truck load <30kN [0.70] [0.70] [0.60]
- L_G 30kN< truck load <160kN [0.70] [0.50] [0.30]
- L_H Roofs [0.00] [0.00] [0.00]
S: Snow for buildings
- S_L = buildings up to 1000m elevation [0.50] [0.20] [0.00]
- S_H = buildings above 1000m elevation [0.70] [0.50] [0.20]
- For SIA 260 with PSI0 as elevation h 1-60/h 1-250/h 1-1000/h
W: Wind for buildings [0.60] [0.20] [0.00]
T: Temperature (no fire) for buildings [0.60] [0.50] [0.00]
F: Settlements [1.00] [1.00] [1.00]
Other actions [0.80] [0.70] [0.50]
A definition of ACT will reinitialize the action with the defaults defined in the INI-file depending
on the category of the design code. Values GAMU to PS1S replace the predefined values.
The user should check the defaults in all cases. Deviations of the PSI-values for wind and
temperature especially for bridges or other non buildings are to be expected as all values are
"boxed values" depending on individual or country dependant settings. For example you will
findinOENORMB4750categorieswithtrucksbetween30and60kNwithvaluesaugmented
by 0.1 for ψ 1and ψ 2.
3-26 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
ForallENcodesaswelltheSIAcodestherearetwodefaultsfortheliveloadforbuildingswith
the categories F,G and H. The user can choose, whether the live load for buildings should be
in an own action L (with categories L_F, L_G and L_H) or whether these categories should be
a part of the action Q in addition to the payloads for buildings (categories Q_A till Q_H).
If the category of the design code or the design code is changed in AQUA, all actions should
be redefined. ACT INIT deletes all defined actions and superposition rules if specified in
SOFiLOAD.
WiththespecificationofACTallsubsequentloadcasesinSOFILOADwillthenhavethisaction
type as default.
The item PART defines, to which action of the selected superposition equation the input ac-
tion belongs. The actions in the superposition equations are distinguished according to their
temporal variances:
• permanent actions: PART G e.g dead load
PART P prestress
• variable actions PART Q
PART Q_1 load group 1
PART Q_2 load group 2
...
PART Q_99 load group 99
• accidental actions PART A
• seismic action PART E
ThustheitemPARTallowsthecorrectclassificationofuser-definedactions,butalsoofspecial
cases as for example PART G SUP ALEX (always but exclusive, it means, that only one load
case is always used). Exclusively the item SUP controls, how the load cases which are a part
of the actions are used for the superposition (always, conditional, mutually exclusive).
Meant for example PART P, that the input action is used in the equation part Pk for superposi-
tionsforultimateandserviceabilitylimitstate(EC,DIN,DIN-FB,seemanualMAXIMA,chapter
2).
The item PART depends on TYPE for preset actions. For example PART G is the default for
theactionsG,G_1andG_2,PARTPfortheactionsPandC,PARTQfortheactionsQandL,
PART A for the action A and PART E for the action E.
The item PART has to be input for user-defined actions. Otherwise the user-defined actions
get PART Q (default).
Hint
All categories of an action must have the same definition of PART. E.g. categories Q_A
and Q_B of the variable action Q get PART Q. Only the load groups of a variable action
PART Q_1 till Q_99 can be different.
TheitemSUPdefinesthedefaulttreatmentofmultipleloadcaseswithinanaction. Thedefault
SOFiSTiK2023 3-27ELLA|InputDescription
will be taken from the INI-File, but for free defined types of actions it is EXCL in general, if the
type of the action has a leading Q it will become COND and for a leading G it will be PERM.
In MAXIMA one may overwrite this for any particular load case of an action or recombine
load cases (e.g. 0.7*LC_101(Ex)+0.5*LC_102(Ey)). Due to historic reasons there are special
literals at record LC in MAXIMA in addition to the literals of SUP:
SOFiLOAD MAXIMA
Remark
ACT SUP LC TYPE
PERM G always (permanent), partial safety factor action-wise
PERC PERC always(permanent)withvariablefactors,partialsafetyfactorload-
case-wise
COND Q conditional (only unfavourable)
EXCL A* mutually exculsive
EXEX Ano mutuallyexclusivebutconditionalinclusivecategories(onlywithin
anaction),MAXIMArecordLConlyonealternativegroupnumber
Ano
UNSI W changing sign (e.g. seismic actions)
USEX X* changing sign, mutually exclusive
ALEX AG1 always but exclusive (only within an action)
F additional load case to be combined
Using SUP PERM the same partial safety factor is used for all load cases of a permanent
action (e.g. ACT G). In this case the sum of the values of the single load cases is decisive,
whether the unfavourable (GAMU) or the favourable (GAMF) partial safety factor is applied. In
the contrast to that the partial safety factors are considered load-case-wisely, if SUP PERC is
defined. Here one load case of the permanent action can get GAMU and another GAMF.
SUP EXEX excludes only categories against each other within an action (no exclusion
of different actions). If for example the categories X_1 and X_2 of the action X are defined
with SUP EXEX, then only the most unfavourable load case is used either from X_1 or from
X_2andalsoonly,ifithasanunfavourablecontribution. Inthecontrasttothatanunfavourable
load case from X_1 and an unfavourable load case from X_2 are used for the input of SUP
EXCL.
SUP ALEX defines a permanent alternative group (MAXIMA record LC TYPE AG1). Only
the load cases of an action or all load cases of the categories of an action are used for the
formationofapermanentalternativegroup. Hereonlyaloadcaseisconsideredforthesuper-
position, also if it has a favourable contribution. Load cases of different actions do not exclude
themselves mutually. If SUP ALEX is input for some actions, a load case is considered per
action.
In program MAXIMA it is additionally possible to assign load cases of an action or category to
severalpermanentalternativegroups. TheinputisdoneinprogramMAXIMAwithLC... TYPE
AG1 till AG99.
The total mechanism of the defaults for the action types is governed by the following rules:
• ByselectingadesigncodewithinAQUAalldefinitionsgivenintheassociatedINI-Fileinthe
3-28 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
[action] -section will become available. If no such file is available, defaults in the program
are available for all EC and newer DIN (since year 2000). For all other cases there are
exactly two predefined actions G and Q without any coefficients or factors.
• When addressing an action, a copy of this definition is created in the database which has
then the possibility of deviating factors if explicitly defined with this record or via the SOFi-
PLUS menus.
• When creating a load case, the factors are copied from the action definition to the load
case. However, those factors may be modified for any individual load case.
• For special design purposes the factors may be changed temporarily when using the load
cases in AQB.
Variable action - load groups:
TheloadgroupsPARTQ_1tillQ_99canbeusedforabetterformationofcombinationwithout
intermediate superpositions in MAXIMA e.g. for the load models of the bridge design (EN
1990/A1). If different load groups are defined for categories with corresponding inputs for the
item SUP, then the intermediate superpositions and the following superpositions are done in
one MAXIMA run.
Example:
PROG SOFILOAD
HEAD
ACT XY_A gamu 1.4 0.0 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 PART Q_1 SUP excl
ACT XY_B gamu 1.3 0.0 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.5 PART Q_1 SUP excl
ACT XY_C gamu 1.45 0.0 0.6 0.3 0.0 0.6 PART Q_2 SUP exex
ACT XY_D gamu 1.35 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.5 PART Q_3 SUP exex
...
PROG MAXIMA
HEAD
COMB 1 desi TYPE desi BASE 2100
ACT XY_A
LC -1
ACT XY_B
LC -1
ACT XY_C
LC -1
ACT XY_D
LC -1
or
COMB 2 expl TYPE desi BASE 2200
ADD {QI} gamm
First of all three load groups Q_1, Q_2 and Q_3 are defined with PART in the program
SOFiLOAD.ThecategoriesXY_AundXY_Bareaartoftheloadgroup1. Theirloadcasesare
mutually exclusive only within the respective category about the input SUP EXCL. The cate-
SOFiSTiK2023 3-29ELLA|InputDescription
goriesXY_CandXY_Dareapartoftheloadgroups2and3. Allloadcasesofbothcategories
are mutually exclusive about the input SUP EXEX.
With one of the MAXIMA combinations then the superposition is done as follows: First of all
MAXIMA searches which load cases of the load group 1 are decisive (possible one ore two or
noloadcase=firstintermediatesuperposition).Thenthedecisiveloadcaseoftheloadgroups
2 and 3 is determined (possible one or no load case = second intermediate superposition). In
the last step the final superposition is done. Either the decisive load cases of the load group 1
or the decisive load case of the goups 2 and 3 are here the final result.
It should be noted here that load groups are mutually exclusive. If, for example, the superpo-
sition of the load cases for two load load groups are specified with SUP COND - conditionally,
only the load cases of the decisive load group are taken into account.
Example:
PROG SOFILOAD
HEAD
ACT XY_1 gamu 1.4 0.0 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 PART Q_1 SUP cond
ACT XY_2 gamu 1.3 0.0 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.5 PART Q_2 SUP cond
The load cases of category XY_1 belong to load group 1 and those of category XY_2 belong
to load group 2. Thus, either the load cases of XY_1 or of XY_2 are taken into account in the
superposition depending on which brings the more unfavorable result.
3-30 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.16 LC – Train Load Loading Case
Seealso: POSL,LANE,,CALC,COMB
LC
Item Description Unit Default
NO Number of load case − 1
TYPE Action type of load case LT -
PSI0 Combination value standard − *
PSI1 Combination value frequent − *
PSI2 Combination value quasi permanent − *
PS1S Combination value non permanent − *
GAMU unfavourable safety factor − *
GAMF favourable safety factor − *
TITL Title of loadcase Lt24 -
The input of the loading occurs in the form of load trains identified by a load case number,
which must not be used for other cases, and the position of load trains within lanes.
The record LC must be followed by the definition of a corresponding load train:
TRAI Specifying the load train
TRPL,TRBL Explicit loading of a load train
ThecombinationvaluesmaybetakenfromtheactionselectedbytheTYPEorwillbedefaultto
thevaluesaccordingtoEC1Part3AppendixC,ormaybespecifiedexplicitly. Fortheresulting
load cases of the evaluation the maximum value of all applied trains will be saved. These
values will then be accepted from the program MAXIMA.
DeviationsofthePSI-valuesforwindandtemperatureespeciallyforbridgesotothernonbuild-
ings are to be expected as all values are "boxed values" depending on individual or country
dependent settings. For example you will find in OENORM B 4750 categories with trucks
between 30 and 60 kN values augmented by 0.1 for ψ1and ψ2.
Furthermore the DIN-Fachberichte supply different combination values for the constant load
an the heavy vehicle.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-31ELLA|InputDescription
3.17 TRAI – Load Train Definition
Seealso: COPY,TRPL,TRBL,LANE,TREX
TRAI
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Type of a load train LT CONS
P1 class of load train or load value kN,m *
P2 second value for load train kN,m *
P3 Third value for load train kN,m *
P4 fourth value for load train kN,m *
P5 loading on spare areas kN/m2 *
P6 Wind loading kN/m2 *
P7 Height of wind attack area [m] *
1001
P8 Parameter for brake load ∗ *
P9 Heightofmasscenter(centrifugalloadandcrossfall) [m] *
1001
PFAC Factor for loading of total train − 1.0
PFAV Factor for favorable effects within load trains − *
WIDT Width of load train [m] *
1001
PHI explicit impact factor for bending − *
PHIS explicit impact factor for shear − *
V Speed of load train [km/h] *
1203
FUGA Factor for the masses of total train for the centrifugal − 1.0
forces
XCON Minimum distance for repeated load train (convoy) [m] 0
1001
YEX possible eccentricity of train (+/-) [m] 0.0
1001
DIR Direction of train LT B
B = in both directions
R = only to the right (positive)
L = only to the left (negative)
N = do not apply
DIRT Direction of transverse loading LT B
B = in both directions
R = only to the right (positive)
L = only to the left (negative)
N = suppress this loading
Parameters for multibody dynamics:
FRB Frequency for body Spring Cb 1/sec ∞
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-32 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Item Description Unit Default
DAB Modal Damping of body support − 0.0
BOGI Load value of bogie −/kN 0.0
FRBO Frequency for bogie Spring Cbo 1/sec ∞
DABO Modal Damping of bogie support − 0.0
WHEE Load value of wheel −/kN 0.0
FRWH Frequency for wheel spring Cwh 1/sec ∞
DAWH Modal Damping of wheel support − 0.0
The description of all available load trains can be found within the next pages. If a value for
the convoy distance is given (XCON), the specified train will be applied multiple times with
that given minimum distance between the last load ordinate and the reference point of the
consecutive load train.
The the residual area loading P5 is applied without dynamic impact factors and without cen-
trifugal forces. It is applied only for:
• Areas between the constant width of the load train and the polygonal bounds of the lane.
If the load train has no width (WIDT 0) there won’t be a residual area either (Railways)
• Areas between the borders of lane 0 and all other lanes (e.g. pathways)
• The total lane area for the load group GR4 (e.g. pedestrian bridges)
The wind loading is generally equal to P6 and acts horizontally upon a traffic band with height
P7. As there will be no traffic for strong winds, this is not the maximum wind load on the
structure itself. The sign of the wind load is defined as positive if coming from the right in the
moving direction, but option DIRT allows a more specific definition. ELLA has the possibility in
record POSL via OPT to apply the wind load in the most unfavourable direction at its own, if
DIRT has allowed this. Both options are combined with a logical ”and”-operation.
ThefactorPFACisamultiplieringeneralforallloadelementsoftheloadtrain,itmaybeused
for classified LM71 or SW/0 loadings. (e.g. a value from the list 0.75 - 0.83 - 0.91 - 1.00 - 1.10
- 1.21 - 1.33 - 1.46 from EN 1991-2 6.3.2(3)).
The factor PFAV specifies the factor for favorable loadings (see e.g. EN 1990-2 GRP 13/14
and 23/24). For road train loadings this factor will be applied only for the wheel loadings. The
default for railway load trains is 0.0 for the LM71 and 1.0 for all other load trains. The default
forthemajorityformostotherroadtrainsis0.0. Forloadtrainsforroads,thosefactorsmaybe
specified only with individual load train definitions.
Theeccentricityoftheloadtrainwithinthelaneshouldonlybedefinedwhenapplyingtheload-
ing. Only for the wide heavy load trains (LM3, HB etc.) an explicit eccentricity of that loading
may be defined a priori. The definition of YEX in TRAI is intended to describe the eccentricity
for railway loadings according EN 1991-2 6.3.5., predefined with r/18 in any direction.
The load trains have a moving direction which is not only important for some of the train loads
but also for the direction of the braking load. Positive load values are considered to be braking
loads in traveling direction, negative load values are accelerating loads in reverse direction. If
SOFiSTiK2023 3-33ELLA|InputDescription
DIR N is specified, no impact factor will be applied and the brake and velocity and wind load
will be preset to zero. Also in this case some filters are available in ELLA.
DIRcontrollsthesequenceofgeneratedloadsforastandardtrain,butitcannotbeusedtoflip
the sequence of a user defined load train.
ThemeaningofvalueP8isdifferentforeachloadingtype. Thesignofthebrakingloadwillbe
takenfromthemovingdirection. Achangingsign(DIRB)willbeonlypossibleforELLAtotake
care of. ELLA and SOFILOAD allow to change the direction or deactivate the loading.
For an analysis with multi-body-dynamics it is possible to generate masses, beams, springs
and dampers via the record TREX. The mass of bogie and wheel may be specified either as a
positive absolute load value or as a negative fraction of the total mass. For more information
see record TREX.
Table of most important Standard Load Trains:
USER constant Area Loading P5 / user defined Load Train
LM1 double axle load model 1 according Eurocode 1 part 3
LM2 single axle load model 2 according Eurocode 1 part 3
LM3 special case load model 3 according Eurocode 1 part 3
SV,SOV Special vehicles according BS EN1991-2
LM4 pedestrian load model 4 according Eurocode 1 part 3
FLM1 Fatigue load model 1 according Eurocode 1 part 3
FLM2 Fatigue load model 1 according Eurocode 1 part 3
FLM3 Fatigue load model 1 according Eurocode 1 part 3
FLM4 Fatigue load model 1 according Eurocode 1 part 3
SLW Heavy load truck according to DIN / OENORM / IAP
LKW Standard truck (according to country code)
LKWD German truck (in Austria)
LKWA Austrian truck
NBR Brasilian load trains NBR 7188 / NB6 similar to SLW/LKW
HS Highway Load according AASHTO
HT Highway Truck according AASHTO
CAN Highway Load according Canadian Standard CSA
CANP Pedestrian load according Canadian Standard CSA
3-34 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
HA HA according BS 5400 / BD 37-01
HB HB according BS 5400 / BD 37-01
HFUG Centrifugal loading according BS 5400 / BD 37-01
IRC Loading Class AA, A, B and Appendix I of
Indian Road Congress 6-2000
JRA Load trains T and L of the Japan Road Association
BRO1 3 axle load train of the Swedish BRO type 1
BRO2 Single axle load train of the Swedish BRO type 2/3/4
BRO3 2 x 3 axle load train of the Swedish BRO type 5
BROF Fatigue relevant load train of the Swedish BRO
NFA Area loading according French Fascicule No 61
NFBC Lorry according French Fascicule No 61
NFBT Tandemaccording French Fascicule No 61
NFC Heavy load trains according French Cerema / Leclerc
AS_A Single wheel / axle according australian AS 5100
AS_M Load train M 1600 according AS 5100
AS_S Load train S 1600 according AS 5100
HLP Heavy load platform according AS 5100.7
LM71 Loading according LM 71
resp. UIC 71 resp. RU of BS 5400
SW Heavy load trains SW/0 DS 804 / EC
SW/2 Heavy load trains SW/2 DS 804 / EC
RFAT Railway Fatigue loading EC and others
HSLM Load trains according EC 1 Annex 2
RL Railway Loading BS 5400
ASRT Railway Loading AS 5100
All load trains may be extended with TRPL and TRBL definitions. If none of the standard load
elementsoftherainshouldbeused,butotherpropertieslikeimpactfactorsshouldberetained,
the literal USER may be defined for P1. The user should take care of:
• The default live load P5 should be deducted for the areas loaded by the defined loading.
• Thedistancetothelastloadofastandardtrainmaybenotasexpectedduetoautomatically
SOFiSTiK2023 3-35ELLA|InputDescription
generated loads of those type and should be checked.
The loading may be applied with a variable eccentricity YEY. For a railway loading (default
±r/18) additional moments are created. For road loading the total train will have an offset
(default 0.0) to the right or left.
3.17.1 Impact Factor
Twodifferentdynamicfactorsareprovidedforbendingorsheareffects. Thevaluesdependon
the dynamic properties of the structure, the type of loading and on an effective length, to be
definedingeneralforeveryindividualelementandresultwithrecordCALC.Ifthatisnotdone,
the value defined with the lane geometry is used, but one can also specify an explicit value for
eachofthosefourvalues. WiththedefinitionofPHISTEE,CONC,PRCOundCOMPvariants
of the formulas may be selected, if the design code supplies such variantst (e.g. IRC, JRA,
SNIP).
Default formulas are:
• DIN Impact factor according to DIN 1072
(Default for SLW and LKW)
PH =1.4−0.008·LPH (3.2)
• UIC Impact factor according to EN 1992 / DS 804
for extended maintenance
(cid:112)
PH =0.82+1.44/( LPH−0.2)≤1.67 (3.3)
• UICB Impact factor according to EN 1992 / DS 804
with standard maintenance
(cid:112)
PH =0.73+2.16/( LPH−0.2)≤2.0 (3.4)
• BS Impact factor according to BS 5400
(cid:112)
PHB=0.73+2.16/( LPH−0.2)≤2.0 (3.5a)
(cid:112)
PHS=0.82+1.44/( LPH−0.2)≤1.67 (3.5b)
• NA Impact factor according to TMH7
PH =0.05·(100+LPH)/(10+LPH) (3.6)
• SW/0 Impact factor according to DS 804
between 1.48 and 1.08
• SW/2 Impact factor according to DS 804
between 1.18 and 1.03
• AASH Impact factor varying according to AASHTO
before 2005 varying between 1.00 and 1.30, newer releses with fixed values
3-36 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
1.15 or 1.33).
PH =1.0+15.24/(LPH+38) (3.7)
• CAN Impact factor according to CAN/CSA
between1.25and1.40,dependingontheavailablelengthforone,twoorthree
axles. (A depencency for the true number of applied axles is not available)
• IRC Impact factor according to Clause 211 Fig. 5. for Class A, B and AA loading
for concrete and steel bridges.
PH =1.0+4.5/(LPH+6) (3.8a)
PH =1.0+9.0/(LPH+13.5) (3.8b)
• JRA Impact factor according to JRA are only distinct for T-Loading, for L-loading
there are deviations for standard concrete and steel bridges.
PH =1.0+20/(50+LPH) (T) (3.9a)
PH =1.0+10/(25+LPH) (L) (3.9b)
• AS Impact factor according to AS 5100 are defined as (1+α). For roads fixed val-
ues are given in Table 6.7.2, however as M1600 requires a greater allowance
ifonlyasinglethree-axlecomponentcontrolsandthereexistsalsoastation-
ary loading S1600 without dynamic allowance, a user definition is required in
some cases.
AS_A PHB=1.0+0.40 (3.10a)
AS_M PHB=1.0+0.30(1.0+0.35) (3.10b)
Railway loading distinguishes between ballasted and direct fixing (input with
LANE) and account for the reference length as follows:
(cid:112)
PHB=1.0+2.16/( LPH−0.20)−0.27 (>3.6) (3.11a)
(cid:112)
PHB=1.0+2.16/( LPH−0.20)−0.17 (>2.0) (3.11b)
LPHIshouldbedefinedfortheaxisviaLANE.HoweverELLAmayalsousethedistanceofthe
zerovaluesoftheinfluencelineasagoodapproachtotheeffectivelength. IfnoinputforLPHI
is given, the dynamic factor will be set equal to the value with a minimum length and the width
of the lane will be set equal to 0.0.
Dynamic coefficients according to appendix E of DIN FB 101 are dependant on the frequency
of the structure and should be specified explicitly therefore.
DynamiccoefficientsaccordingtotheFrenchFasciculeNo. 61section5.5dependontheratio
G/S of the permanent to the maximum loading. If this formula should be taken this ratio has to
be specified instead of the impact factor PHI.
3.17.2 Centrifugal Forces
In case of a curve, the mass of the loading, usually derived from the vertical load, is used
together with the speed of the train and the curvature of the lane to compute the centrifugal
SOFiSTiK2023 3-37ELLA|InputDescription
load components.
The forces calculated according to the laws of physics with vin [ m/sec] are:
2
P ƒ =P · ; g=9.80665 m/sec2 (3.12)
Rg
Sometimes there is an equivalent formula in the design code for a speed in [ km/h] with a
factor of v2/(127R).
These forces will be replaced for Eurocode and BRO as follows:
According to Eurocode EC 1-3 4.3 (independent from v)
Q tk =0.2·Q  (r <200m) (3.13a)
Q tk =40·Q /R (200m≤r ≤1500m) (3.13b)
Q tk =0 (r >1500m) (3.13c)
These forces will be replaced for BS as follows:
100
Q tk =Q · (3.14)
R+150
These forces will be changed for railway loadings UIC as follows:
UIC Reduction according DS 804 / BS 5400 / EC 1-3 6.5
for v > 120 km/h and L > 2.88
−120 (cid:12)814 (cid:12)
(cid:12)·(cid:12) (cid:12)1−(cid:112)2.88/L(cid:12)
red=1.0− ·(cid:12) (cid:12) +1.75(cid:12) (cid:12) (3.15)
1000 (cid:12)  (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
ForFUGAyoumayhoweverspecifyanadditionalfactorexplicitly. Negativefactorswillenforce
the laws of physic to all type of load trains.
Inthosecaseswhereaconstanthorizontalcentrifugalloadingorhorizontalbumpinghastobe
considered a horizontal loading PW/HW may be specified with TRPL/TRBL.
3.17.3 Load Trains according to Eurocode
The position of the loading according to Eurocode along the traffic lanes is free. Thus a syn-
chronizationwithsecondary lanesshouldnotbeapplied. Fortheassessmentof globaleffects
(EN 1991-2 4.3.2) each tandem system should be assumed to travel centrally along the axes
of notional lanes. With a definition of YEX, ELLA may apply this excentricity value in both di-
rections. But the minimum distance of 0.5 m between adjacent loading cannot be checked by
ELLA, but will be satisfied in almost all cases if the width of the lane is at least 2.5 m.
Thedoubleaxleshouldbeappliedonlyintotal. Thusallloadsoftheaxleswillbeappliedeven
if one is favourable.
Load Model 1
There is one double axle with a spacing of 1.2 m. For the different lane classes it is generally
3-38 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
α QQ k α QQ k α qq k
0.5∗
2.00 1
0.5∗
2
3
Figure3.10: Loadmodel1
recommended to use three different load trains with individual adjustment factors α q. These
factorsarespecifiedinnationalannexesandaredefinedintheINI-files. (e.g. DINFachbericht
with a value of α Q= 0.8, SIA with a value of α Q= 0.9). Other values may be specified with a
direct load value if needed.
P1 = Class 300 200 100
P2 = Axle load [ kN] 300 200 100
P3 = reserved [ kN] 0 0 0
P4 = traffic lane [ kN/m2] 9.0 2.5 2.5
P5 = Residual area [ kN/m2] 2.5 2.5 2.5
P8 = Brake loading [ kN] * 0.0 0.0
The brake loading is calculated according to the length of the total lane if the item DIR is not
defined as N. It will be distributed as uniform load along the whole loaded lane if the axle load
exceeds 200 kN:
Q k =1.2·P2+0.10·P4·WDT·L ; 180α Q1 ≤Q k ≤900kN (3.16)
The upper limit is defined by the requests of the STANAG, it may be redefined by a national
annex or other means. This may be specified via a global variable EN1991-2_QLMAX in the
INI-file or via TVAR in the section loading.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-39ELLA|InputDescription
Load Model 2
Thisloadmodelisasingleaxletakenfromloadmodel1,butwithadynamicimpactfactorand
thewheelsmayactindependently. Asthisloadmodelisonlyforlocalelementsitshouldnotbe
selected within ELLA, especially as it does not work with influence areas (INT>2). A possible
application is the accidential load case of a vehicle on the pathway:
1 2 1 2
0.40
2.00
3
α Q 00.2
Q2 2k
0.40
3
0.50
Figure3.11: Loadmodel2
P1 = Basic Value 400 300 200 100
P2 = Axle load [ kN] 320 240 160 80
P3 = Rotation [ ◦] 0 0 0 0
P5 = Residual area [ kN/m2] 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
P8 = Brake loading [ kN] 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
3-40 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Load Model 3
Figure3.12: Loadmodel3
Thisloadmodelisforspecialcasesofheavyloadvehicles. Wehavetodistinguishbetweenthe
narrow version fitting within one lane (2 axles) and the broader version for P2=240 (3 axles).
For the latter case the loading of the same load train in two synchronized lanes with special
provisionsofYEXshouldbeused. Partsoftheloadtrainnotwithinthelaneimitswillbeclipped
automatically.
The three values of P1 to P3 define the loading as follows (Table A1):
SOFiSTiK2023 3-41ELLA|InputDescription
600 / 150 4 × 150 kN
900 / 150 6 × 150 kN
1200 / 150 8 × 150 kN
1200 / 200 6 × 200 kN
1500 / 150 10 × 150 kN
1500 / 200 7 × 200 kN + 1 × 100 kN
1800 / 150 12 × 150 kN
1800 / 200 9 × 200 kN
2400 / 200 12 × 200 kN
2400 / 240 10 × 240 kN
2400 / 200 / 200 6 × 200 kN + 6 × 200 kN
2700 / 150 18 × 150 kN
3000 / 200 15 × 200 kN
3000 / 240 12 × 240 kN + 1 × 120 kN
3000 / 200 / 200 8 × 200 kN + 7 × 200 kN
3600 / 200 18 × 200 kN
3600 / 240 15 × 240 kN
3600 / 200 / 200 9 × 200 kN + 9 × 200 kN
4500 / 150 / 150 15 × 150 kN + 15 × 150 kN
1.50 1.50
X X
4.20
2.70
1.50 1.50
1.50 1.50
1 2 1 2
3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00
Figure3.13: LoadmodellLM3
The variants with an axle loading of 240 kN are wider than the default lane. Thus, it is in
3-42 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
general necessary to specify a transverse offset when applying this load. This will be +/- 0.75
m for the main lane, +2.25 for the left adjacent lane and -2.25 for the right adjacent lane.
Thespeedoftheloadtrainisaveryimportantparameter,itdoesnotonlycontrolfrontandrear
for some load trains, but it defines also if the load train is moving slowly (v = 5 km/h) or with a
regular speed (v = 70 km/h). This triggers if an impact factor is applied or not.
Furthertherewillbenoloadingwitinadistanceof25mbeforeandbehindthatvehicle,butthen
a load train LM1 with ist frequent load values (ψ 1) may be applied, by specifying the load case
number of a correspondig LM1 load train at P4. To select the relative position to the vehicle
beforeorbehindthesignoftheP4definitionwillbetaken. Apositivevaluewillselectavehicel
before, while a negative value will select a value behind. The implemented algorithm does not
allow to select this automatically.
As the coefficients ψ 1are different for UDL and TS, we use from this load case the value ψ 1for
TS, but for UDL and the residual loding the default value of 0.4 of the EN will be taken.
Load Model 3 (NA BS)
NA to BS EN 1991-2:2003 defines different types of this load model. The distance to the
residual loading in the lane has been reduced to 2.5 resp 5.0 m. As every axle has a different
dynamic amplification factor, these will be applied directly if V is larger than 5 km/h.
Load trains of the Special Types General Order (STGO) will be selected with TYPE SV, where
P1 defines the class (80, 100 or 196), P2 is not used and P3 defines the central distance
(values of 1.2, 5.0 and 9.0 m are common). All other remarks especially about P4 remain
valid:
165 165 165 165 165 165 165 165 165 180 180 180
kN kN kN kN kN kN kN kN kN kN kN kN
1.2m 1.2m 1.2m 1.2m 1.2m 1.2m 1.2m 4.0m 1.6m 4.4m
3
0.35 m
m
53.0
m
1
0.3
2
Figure3.14: LoadModel3(NABS)
Load trains of the Special Order (SO) will be selected with TYPE SOV:
SOFiSTiK2023 3-43ELLA|InputDescription
Figure3.15: LoadmodellSO
P1 = Class 250 350 450 600
P2 = combination of tractors in gradients larger 1:25
= Number of pulling tractors * 10 + number of pushing tractors
P3 = explicit fixed distance between trailers (default is variable)
Load Model 4
This is a pedestrian load model with a basic load area with a maximum value of 5.0kN/m2.
For a loaded length greater 10 m the load value will be decreased:
120
q ƒk =2.0+ >2.50 kN/m2 (3.17)
L+30
Further we have the standard service vehicle according Eurocode:
Q Q
SV1 SV2
3.00 m
0.20 m
0.20 m
1.30 m
X
Figure3.16: LoadModel4
3-44 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
P1 = Axle loading QSV1 80 kN
P2 = Axle loading QSV2 40 kN
P3 = Distance of axles 3.00 m
Fortheapplicationofthisloadmodelthedefinitionoftheloadgroupismandatory: GR3orGR4
for the area loading and GR0 for the service vehicle.
Load Model FLM1
This model is identical to LM1, but the Axle loads will be reduced by a factor of 0.7, and the
distributed loading by 0.3.
P1 = Class 300 200 100
P2 = Axle load [ kN] 210 140 70
P3 = traffic lane [ kN/m2] 2.7 0.75 0.75
P5 = Residual area [ kN/m2] 0.75 0.75 0.75
P8 = Brake loading [ kN] * 0.30 0.30
Load Model FLM2
This selects via P1 the frequent truck models according Table 4.6 with the following axle load
values:
P1 = 1 90 / 190 kN
P1 = 2 80 / 140 / 140 kN
P1 = 3 90 / 180 / 120 / 120 / 120 kN
P1 = 4 90 / 190 / 140 / 140 kN
P1 = 5 90 / 180 / 120 / 110 / 110 kN
SOFiSTiK2023 3-45ELLA|InputDescription
Figure3.17: LoadModelFLM2
Load Model FLM3
1.20 m 6.00 m 1.20 m
0.40 m

2.00 m 0.40 m X 1
Figure3.18: LoadModelFLM3
3-46 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
This is a complete truck with two double axles P1 with a distance of 6.0 m designed for the
fatigue design.
P1 = axle loading [ kN] 120
P5 = default life load [ kN/m2] 0.0
Load Model FLM4
ThisselectsviaP1theheavyloadtrucksaccordingtotable4.7withthefollowingaxleloading:
P1 = 1 70 / 130 kN
P1 = 2 70 / 120 / 120 kN
P1 = 3 70 / 150 / 90 / 90 / 90 kN
P1 = 4 70 / 140 / 90 / 90 kN
P1 = 5 70 / 130 / 90 / 80 / 80 kN
Figure3.19: LoadModelFLM4
SOFiSTiK2023 3-47ELLA|InputDescription
3.17.4 Load Trains SLW and LKW
Load Train SLW
Figure3.20: LoadTrainSLW
Load Train LKW
Figure3.21: LoadTrainLKW
Those classical load trains are used in several countries in Europe (DIN 1072, OENORM B
4002, Spanische IAP and Brasilian NBR). National variants may be selected with a country
code. The width of the moving loading is 3.0 m in general, for the OENORM it is 2.5 m and for
the Spanish IAP a minimum distance to the secondary truck suggests a width of 4.0 m. The
rest of the traffic band is loaded by P3, the remaining areas inside the lane are loaded with
the basic area loading P5. With DIR N one may select a secondary lane without any dynamic
factors.
The definition of a second load train beside with P2 und P4 can not be supported for some
of the recent features. It us strongly recommended to use synchronized lanes instead, it is
required to use two lanes with individual load trains instead. The loading in the second lane
requires the value of P5 defined for P3 and the impact factor to be deactivated with 1.0.
All loads are divided to portions to the right and to the left of the lane axis, which can act
independently.
3-48 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Axial Loads [kN] P3 (cid:2)kN/m2(cid:3) P5 (cid:2)kN/m2(cid:3)
SLW 30 100 5.0 3.0
SLW 60 200 5.0 3.0 ∗
LKW 3 20+10 3.0 2.0
LKW 6 40+20 4.0 2.0
LKW 9 60+30 4.0 3.0
LKW 12 80+40 4.0 3.0
LKW 16 100+60 5.0 3.0
LKWA 16 110+50 4.0 3.0
LKWA 25 170+80 5.0 3.0
NBR 24 80(SLW) 4.0 3.0
NBR 30 100(SLW) 5.0 3.0
NBR 36 120(SLW) 5.0 3.0
NBR 45 150(SLW) 5.0 3.0
NBR 12 80/40(LKW) 4.0 3.0
∗ TheIAP(Instruccinsobrelasaccionesaconsiderarenalproyectodepuentesdecarretera,
Ministeriodefomento,2000)hasaconstantvalueof4.0kN/m2 onthetotalareaofthebridge,
but without any deduction for the SLW. For fatigue a SLW with 390 kN and an impact factor of
1.2 = 468 kN, to be obtained with PFAC 0.78.
Wind loading: P6 = 1.25 kN/m2
P7 = 3.50 m
Brake loading: P8 = 1.00 (Factor for horizontal force)
DIN 1072 defines a total brake loading with a maximum of 900 kN and a minimum of 30 % of
theheavyloadtrainswithintheprincipalandsecondarylaneor25%ofthetotalprincipallane.
As the brake loading is an other load class than the standard life load it is not always possible
toapplybothloadswithinoneloadcase. IAPhasaminimumof140kNandamaximumof720
kN.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-49ELLA|InputDescription
3.17.5 Load trains BS 5400, TMH7
Load Train for HA, NA
Figure3.22: LoadTrainforHA,NA
The loading HA and NA is described by a uniform load and an additional concentrated single
or tandem load with spacing P4.
TheloadingHA(DepartmentalStandardBD37)isrepresentedbyauniformloadP3·pu,with
themagnitudepudependingonthelengthoftheloading,andeitheraconcentratedload(KEL)
P1=120 kN or a tandem loading with P1=148 kN (with distance P2, default 1.2m). The value
of P4 defines the loaded length L. If P4 is not given, L will be calculated in ELLA based on the
sum of the distances of the null points of the influence line.
The value pu is calculated from the total loaded length L
• up to L = 50 m:
p=336·L−0.67
(3.18)
• from L = 50 m (and for the tandem loading):
p=36·L−0.1
(3.19)
It is then possible that shorter loaded lengths could lead to higher forces. As this can not be
treated easily, ELLA uses an approximation by evaluating an effective length according to BD
37/01 figure 11. “Base lengths for highly cusped influence lines”. In a first step the integral
of the total positive and negative contributions of the influence line will be evaluated, then the
effective length is caluclated:
(Area under IL)
L eƒƒ =2· ≤(total length of IL) (3.20)
(value of maximum ordinate)
In Hong Kong (BS + Country code 852) the formulas are slightly different:
• up to L = 70 m:
p=400·L−0.67
(3.21)
3-50 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
• from L = 70 m:
p=44·L−0.15 <14.85 kN/m (3.22)
theolddefinitionofBSmaybeselectedifP4isspecifiedexplicitlynegativeorthecountrycode
has been set for Israel (972). it is defined as:
p=151·L−0.475 ; 9≤p≤30 (3.23)
Wind loading: P6 = 1.25 kN/m
P7 = 2.50 m
The brake loading is also calculated according to the loaded length of the lane:
P8 = 200kN+8.0·L≤700kN
The loading NA (Bridge Design Code TMH7, South Africa 1981) is represented by a uniform
load P3 · pu, with the magnitude depending on the length of the loading and a concentrated
(cid:112)
loadP1=144/ nkN(KEL).ThevalueofP4definestheloadedlengthLaswiththeHAloading
described above. P2 may be used as with HA to generate a tandem loading.
The value pu is calculated from the total loaded length L
• up to L = 36 m:
p=36 (3.24)
• from L = 36 m:
p=6+180/L−0.5
(3.25)
Wind loading: P6 = 1.25 kN/m
P7 = 2.50 m
The brake loading is also calculated according to the loaded length of the lane:
P8 = 100kN+3.0·L≤400kN
The loading HFUG allows centrifugal loading according BD 37-01 6.9, It contains a concen-
trated transverse load and a equal but distributed vertical loading P1. The load train may be
repeated every 50 m. It shall be applied for radii less than 1000 m.
TheloadvalueP1defaultsto400kN(300kNforIsrael’sIS1227). Thelengthofthedistributed
loading is preset with P2 = 6.0 m.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-51ELLA|InputDescription
3.17.6 Heavy Load trains BS 5400, TMH7, IS 1227
Load Train HB, NB
Figure3.23: LoadTrainHB,NB
The loading HB and NB consists of a heavy loading and a simultaneous traffic band load.
P1 = 30.0 (Default Axle loading class)
values between 24 and 45 are possible, axle loading is 10 times P1
In some countries very similar load trains are used (South Africa, Israel). These Variants will
be selected with type NB or the selected country code:
COUN = GB BS 5400 with distances 1.8 and x = 6.0, 11.0, 16.0, 21.0 or 26.0 m
COUN = ZA TMH7 NB with distances 2.0 and x = 6.0, 11.0, 16.0, 21.0 or 26.0 m
COUN = IL IS 1227 with distances 1.5 and x = 8.0, 13.0, 18.0 or 23.0 m
BS5400makesadistinctionbetweenfourpositionsoftheHBloading,whichaffectthemagni-
tude of the traffic band load. These are controlled by the factor P3 and the eccentricity P2:
P3 = 1.000 ; P2 = 0.0 HA-UDL simply centred
P3 = 2.000 ; P2 = 0.0 HA-UDL doubly centred
P3 = 1.333 ; P2 = +a/4 HA-UDL full to the right, 1/3 to the left
a = nominal lane width
P3 = 1.333 ; P2 = -a/4 HA-UDL full to the left, 1/3 to the right
a = nominal lane width
The value P3 of the latter load varies with the length P4 according to the loading HA.
TheDepartmentalStandardBD37/88hasotherfactors(Table14). ThedefaultvalueforP3will
be selected based on a nominal width bLof 3.048 m and the first lane.
TMH7 applies the NB vehicle not combined with other life loads. Values P2 to P4 will be
ignored.
Basic area loading: P5 = 0.00 kN/m2
3-52 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Wind loading: P6 = 1.25 kN/m2
P7 = 2.5 m
Brake loading are % of the total load. If the train has a unique traveling direction it is applied
between the first and second axle. If the train travels in both directions it is distributed in two
separate blocks at both ends.
P8 = 0.25 (HB)
P8 = 0.20 (NB)
Hint
The basic area loading P5 is not deducted in the case of HA and HB loading. It always
acts upon the full width of the lane.
Load Train HC, NC
TMH7 knows also a NC loading. This is defined by two blocks of varying width, length and
distance. If the variation of this loading becomes to complex a definition with individual block
loads with TRBL may be useful.
(cid:2)kN/m2(cid:3)
P1 = 30.0 (Area loading )
P2 = 5.0 (Width of loading [m])
P3 = 40.0 (Total loaded length [m])
The IS 1227 has a load train HC, which is very similar to the HB. The axial load of the last two
axles is augmented by a factor of 2, the distance x is exactly 13.0 m.
3.17.7 Live Loads according to AASHTO
The Loadtrain HL-93 may be selected in a SI and an US Version, as the load values are not
completely equivalent.
Old loading according AASHTO has three loading classes 10, 15 and 20, derived from the
gross weight of a two axle loading in tons. Beside the orginal two axle load train (HS), there
is a three axle load train (HT) with a variant spacing, a uniform loading an single or tandem
axles.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-53ELLA|InputDescription
Load Train HS (AASHTO edition 1944)
Figure3.24: LoadTrainHS
TheloadingHSisdescribedbyauniformloadandanadditionalconcentratedsingleortandem
load with spacing P4. The value P1 specifies the load train class according to AASHTO. The
value P2 of the old load definitions should be selected manually for shear and moments.
The width of the train is 10’ = 3.048 m. The following values are possible:
P1 Load train P2 (HS) P3 P4
10 HS10-44 (13.0,9.0) kip 0.32 klf 0
15 HS15-44 (19.5/13.5) kip 0.48 klf 0
20 HS20-44 (26.0/18.0) kip 0.64 klf 0
Wind loading: P6 = 1.46 kN/m
P7 = 1.829 m (6ft)
Brake loading: P8 = 0.05 (friction coefficient)
Load train HT (two and three axle truck, ed. 2002/2005)
32 kip 32 kip
(145 kN) (145 kN)
8 kip
(35 kN)
P3
14' 0" to 30' 0" 14' 0"
(4.3 to 9.0 m) (4.3 m)
Figure3.25: LoadtrainHL/HST(threeaxletruck,ed. 2002/2005)
3-54 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
The load train has a width of 10 ft (3.048 m), the variant distance can be between 14 and 30
ft (4.30 to 9.00 m). The special version US2 resp. SI2 selects the two compact vehicles with a
mimim distance of 50 ft (15 m) with 90% of the loading for negative moments.
The total weight P2, the lane load P3 and teh distance P4 are preset as follows:
P1 Load Train P2 P3 P4
10 H10-44 20 kip 0.32 klf -
15 H15-44 30 kip 0.48 klf -
20 H20-44 40 kip 0.64 klf -
US HL 93 72 kip 0.640 klf 14 ÷ 30 ft
SI HL 93 325 kN 9.3 kN/m 4.30 ÷ 9.00 m
US2 HL 93 72 kip 0.640 klf 14 ft
SI2 HL 93 325 kN 9.3 kN/m 4.30 m
USF HL 93 (fat) 72 kip 0.640 klf 4 ft
SIF HL 93 (fat) 325 kN 9.3 kN/m 1.20 m
Basic area loading: P5 = 0.00 kN/m2
Wind loading: P6 = 1.46 kN/m2
P7 = 1.829 m
Brake loading: P8 = 0.05 (frictional coefficient)
The traffic band load P3 has been specified in the 2002 edition as an alternate loading, which
canbeobtainedbysettingP3equaltozero. WiththeloadmodelHL93theloadingP3isactive
on the full longitudinal length.
The variable distance between the two axles of the HL may be overwritten with a fixed value
byP4. Thedetailedloadmodelforlocalandfatiguedesignmaybeselectedwiththeloadtrain
typesUSFandSIFswitchingthedynamicallowanceimpactfactorto1.15andafixeddistance
of 30" (9.0 m). P4 is then the spacing of the double axis, thus P4 0.0 will create the simplified
modell.
3.17.8 Load trains according CAN/CSA
The Canadian standards define a truck load in several variants. The type CAN is used for the
default load train according chapter 14.9.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-55ELLA|InputDescription
Axle no. 1 2 3 4 5
0.04W 0.1W 0.1W 0.14W 0.12W Wheel loads
CL-W
0.08W 0.2W 0.2W 0.28W 0.24W Axle loads
25 62.5 62.5 87.5 75 Wheel loads, kN
CL-625
50 125 125 175 150 Axle loads, kN
3.6 m 1.2 m 6.6 m 6.6 m
18 m
0.25 m
(Typ.)
0.25 m 2.40 m 1.80 m 0.60 m
(Typ.) (Typ.)
Figure3.26: LoadtrainsaccordingCAN/CSA
The value P1 defines the level of the load train (CL, CL4 = only 4 axles, CL3 = only 3 axles)
The definitions ON, ON4 and ON3 select the variants for Ontario according Annex A14.4.
The definitions BC, BC4 and BC3 select the variants for Britisch Columbia. The definition MV
selects the maintenace vehicle according 3.8.11.
The value P2 defines the class of the load train (default 625).
If the value P3 is defined ( 9.0, 8.0 or 7.0 for class A, B or C and D) a constant lane load will
be defined with reduced load values of the load train without any dynamic allowance. For this
loading a braking load P8 of min(700,180+0.1*L) will be applied. So P8 should become zero
for secondary lanes.
The height of the wind attack area P7 is 3.0[ m] , the zentrifugal force is acting at P9=2.0[ m]
aove the lane.
The value P4 defines the fixed distance to the 4th load of the vehicle, it is 6.6 in general, but
up to 18 m in British Columbia.
Further wit Literals EP1 and EP2 the special load trains EPLL1 and EPLL2 may be selected.
The value P8 defines a factor on the braking load which is applied as 180+0.1*P3*L but not
larger than 700 kN distributed along the total length. P8 0.0 deactivates this type of loading.
3.17.9 Load trains IRC 6-2000
The provisions of the Indian Roads Congress has load trains acting always in total. The type
of the load train is always IRC, the subtype is given via P1. There will be no other life load on
the bridge (P5=0.0). How many lanes should be loaded is given in table 2.
• IRC AA - Heavy Loading for certain areas or highways This is a bogie of two axles with a
total weight of P2 (40t). There is only one lane loaded with this train.
3-56 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
• IRCAAT-LoadingforcertainareasorhighwaysThisisatrackedvehiclewithatotalweight
of P2 (70t). A convoy with a minimum distance of 90 m is foreseen. There is only one lane
loaded with this train.
• IRCA-LoadingforallpermanentbridgesThisisatrainwithtwotrailers,repeatablewitha
minimum distance of 18.5 m. The axle loading is P2 (27 kN), P3 (114 kN) and P4 (68 kN).
• IRCB-LoadingfortimberbridgesandtemporarystructuresThisisatrainwithtwotrailers,
repeatable with a minimum distance of 18.5 m. The axle loading is P2 (16 kN), P3 (68 kN)
and P4 (41 kN).
• IRC nnR
All numbersrefer to thehypothetical vehicles ofappendix 1. An appended Rwill select the
wheeled trains, an appended S the four wheelers (only 3 to 24) and an appended T will
select the tracked vehicle:
3, 5, 9, 12, 18, 24, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70
• IRCPDforloadingonfootwaysisjustaselectabletype. Thereductionaccordingtoclause
209.4 dependant from width and length has to be done by the user explicitly via parameter
P5.
Forthelongitudinaleffectsoftheloadingtheclause208establishesreductionfactorformultiple
lanes. This effect should be taken into account during the superposition of load cases.
The brake load with P8 (0.2 = 20 %) is defined as the fraction for the first load train, while the
other trains have only half of this value. P8 = 0.05 should be applied in the case of more than
two lanes to the other ones.
Wind loading: P6 = 1.0 kN/m2
P7 = 3.0 m
(attack in height of 1.5 m with 3 kN/m)
The height of the mass centre is defined as P9 = 1.2 m.
3.17.10 Load trains of the Japan Road Association
JRAT JRAL
www.road.or.jp
Figure3.27: JapaneseLoadTrains
The following load trains are available:
SOFiSTiK2023 3-57ELLA|InputDescription
JRAT A Mult. Single Axis Class A for L < 15.0 m
JRAT B Mult. Single Axis Class B for L < 15.0 m with Tab. 2.2.2.
P2 Value of axle load (200 kN)
P4 Effective span length L
k = L/32 + 7/8 < 1.5 (for JRAT B)
P5 Residual load for pedestrian areas (3.5 kN/m2)
JRAL A Area loading Class A for L > 15.0 m with D= 6 m
JRAL B Area loading Class B for L > 15.0 m with D= 10 m
P2 basic lane load p2 (3.50, kN/m2)
P3 extra lane load p1 (10 / 12 kN/m2)
P4 Effective span length L to reduce p2 if > 80 m.
P5 Residual area loading is enforeced to p2 or p2/2 depending on
PFAC.
Loads for pedestrian lanes according to Tab. 2.2.4. have to be defined with type JRAL and
P3=0.0.
3.17.11 Load trains AS 5100
The provisions of the Australian AS 5100 may be subdivided in two basic load trains.
AS_A 160 A single axle, including the special case of a single wheel W 80 for local ef-
fects.
and further a system with 12 axles and a variant length to be used with influence lines.
360 kN 360 kN 360 kN 360 kN
6 kN/m
ELEVATION
1.25 1.25 3.75 1.25 1.25 Varies6.25min. 1.25 1.25 5.0 1.251.25
0.6
0.2 2.0
0.4 3.2mstandarddesign 0.6
PLAN
Figure3.28: LoadtrainsAS5100
AS_M the moving load M 1600
AS_S the stationary load S 1600
P1 = Total load (1600)
P2 = Load of an axle group (360/240)
3-58 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
P3 = uniform distributed load (6 / 24 kN/m)
P4 = fixed distance ( > 6.25 m)
P8 = Brake coefficient acc. 6.8.2.
0.45 for single lane (200 < FBS < 720)
0.15 for multi lane
If more than one lane is loaded, the second lane shall be loaded with a lane factor of 0.8 all
subsequent lanes with 0.4. For fatigue 70 percent of the A160 or M1600 load without uniform
load value P3 should be used.
The"heavyloadplatform"isgiveninAS5100.7. Itisaloadwith16axleswith200kNeachfor
theHLP320and250kNfortheHLP400. Toobtainthevariabledistancebetween6and15m
between two groups of 8 axles each of the old design code, speciy P2 -1.0.
HLP P1 = total weight in tons (320/400)
P2 = distance between groups (default = 6 to 15 m)
3.17.12 Swedish Load Trains (BRO 2004)
Figure3.29: SwedishLoadTrains(BRO2004)
TheSwedishloadtrainshavethespecialfeatureofvariantdistancesbetweentheloadswhich
are best treated using influence lines. However the short distance of 1.5m will be fixed to that
minimum value, as there are hardly cases to be expected not yielding the most unfavourable
value with that short distance.
Most train types have different load values for primary and secondary lanes. The parameter
P1 is used to specify an enumeration for the most important lane, the secondary lane etc.
BRO1 3 axle load train of the Swedish BRO type 1/4
P1 Lane index 1 2 3 4
P2 Axle load [ kN] 250 170 0 325
P3 Line loading [ kN/m] 12 9 6 0
P4 explicit distance (minimum 6.0 m)
P5 area loading [ kN/m2] 4 3 2 0
BRO2 Single axle load train of the Swedish BRO type 2/3
SOFiSTiK2023 3-59ELLA|InputDescription
P1 Lane index 1 2 3
P2 Axle load [ kN] 310 210 155
BRO5 2 x 3 axle load train of the Swedish BRO type 5
Figure3.30: BRO5
P1 Lane index 1 2 3
P2 Axle load [ kN] 250 170 0
P3 Line loading [ kN/m] 12 9 6
P4 explicit distance (minimum 6.0 m)
P5 area loading [ kN/m2] 4 3 2
The second train has a distance with minimum of 50 m, the individual loads with
a minimum of 10 m
BROF Fatigue relevant load train of the Swedish BRO
Figure3.31: BROF
3.17.13 French Load Trains
TheoldFrenchloadtrains(FASCICULENo. 61)definetheloadingsasmassvalues. According
to all other loadings they will be now defined in kN based on a conversion factor of 10.
There are two variants available:
FirstthereisanarealoadoftypeNFA,wheretheloadvalueisdependantontheloadedlength.
3-60 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
360
≥4.0−0.002·L(cid:148) kN/m2(cid:151)
A=2.3+ (3.26)
12+L
Whilethisequationisusedwiththisloading,noactionwillbetakentocheckifashorterloaded
length has a more severe effect.
Thelanefactorsaccordingparagraph4.2ofthedocumentcanbespecifiedwiththeglobalload
factor PFAC.
The second load train NFB describes the load trains Bc and Bt, applicable for local checks.
Type of load train NFBC NFBT
P1 Total load [ kN] 300 320
P2 Number of vehicles 1 -
According to the document only one vehicle should be loaded with braking loads, this will be
the first vehicle.
Figure3.32: FrenchLoadTrains(FASCICULENo. 61)
The third load train NFC describes exceptional heay load trains.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-61ELLA|InputDescription
Type of loadtrain P1 P2
P.E.B. Leclerc (1999) L 96
CEREMA Semi-Remorque (2016) R 72
CEREMA Semi-Remorque (2016) R 94
CEREMA Semi-Remorque (2016) R 120
CEREMA Grue Automotive (2016) G 72
CEREMA Grue Automotive (2016) G 94
CEREMA Grue Automotive (2016) G 108
Figure3.33: FrenchLoadTrains(CEREMA)
3.17.14 Railway train loads
Load trains of the railway are defined as axle loading in general. To get distributed loads
more data is required, this is the dimension of the ballast with the lane definition and here the
distanceofthesleepersandthegaugewidth. Therearedifferentgaugewidths,dependenton
the country code the default is:
• 1520 mm (Russian gauge) Russia, Ukraine, Finland
• 1668 mm (Iberic gauge) Spain, Portugal
• 1676 mm (Indian gauge) India, Pakistan, Argentina, Chile
• 1435 mm (Standard gauge) all others
3-62 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Load train LM71 = UIC 71 = RU (BS5400)
Figure3.34: LoadtrainLM71=UIC71=RU(BS5400)
Defaults: P1 = Sleeper distance / block length
0 with four single loads (Default)
>0 with distributed single loads
6.4 with simplified block load
P2 = Axle loading (250 kN)
P3 = Lane loading (80 kN/m)
P4 = Nosing force (100 kN)
PFAC = coefficient α (0.75, 0.83, 0.91, 1.00, 1.10, 1.21, 1.33, 1.46)
The type LM71 is considered for a train within a excellent maintained track. If that is not the
case, it is possible to select with type UICB a variant with impact factors for the standard
maintenance.
Loadings are defined with a possible eccentricity of 1/18 of the gauge according to EC/DIN-
Fachbericht. The direction of this eccentricity is selected according to the centrifugal force. An
explicitdefinitionwithYEX0deactivatesthisfeatureallowingtospecifyexplicitvaluesinCOPY
YEX.
For a sleeper distance up to 0.8 m each load is converted to 3 single loads equal to 0.25 · PA,
0.50 · PA and 0.25 · PA at distances of P1 from each other. A value greater 0.8 will yield a
constant block load as follows:
SOFiSTiK2023 3-63ELLA|InputDescription
Figure3.35: LoadtrainUIC=LM71=UIC71=RU(BS5400)-ConstantBlockLoad
Wind loading: P6 = 1.25 kN/m2
P7 = 4.00 m
Brake loading: P8 = 20.0 kN/m (constant brake load, but in total less than 6000 kN)
(-33.0 kN/m for traction, but in total less than 1000 kN)
Centre of mass: P9 = 1.8 m
Aerodynamic loading due to trains passing and derailing loading are not available.
Load train SW Schwerlastzug
Figure3.36: LoadtrainSWSchwerlastzug
Load train SW/2 Schwerlastzug
Figure3.37: LoadtrainSW/2Schwerlastzug
3-64 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Defaults: P2 = Block load 133 kN/m / 150 kN/m
P4 = Nosing force (100 kN)
Wind loading: P6 = 1.25 kN/m2
P7 = 4.00 m
Brake loading: P8 = 20.0 kN/m (constant brake load)
P8 = 35.0 kN/m (constant brake load)
Hint
load trains SW will act also if their contributions have favourable effects.
Load train RFAT Real Load trains of EC / DIN Fachbericht etc.
Defaults: P1 = Class of load train
1 = Passenger train with engine (663 t)
2 = Passenger train with engine (530 t)
3 = High speed passenger train (940 t)
4 = High speed passenger train (510 t)
5 = freight train with engine (2160 t)
6 = freight train with engine (1431 t)
7 = freight train with engine (1035 t)
8 = freight train with engine (1035 t)
9 = suburban multiple unit train (296 t)
10 = subway - multiple unit train (360 t)
11 = freight train with engine (1135 t)
12 = freight train with engine (1135 t)
IC = German Intercity (549 t)
ICE1 = German Intercity 1 (780 t)
ICE2 = German Intercity 2 (693.6 t)
ICE3 = German Intercity 3 (992.6 t)
ICE4 = German Intercity 4 (1092 t)
ICT2 = German Intercity-T (2xBR411=814 t)
ICT3 = German Intercity T (3xBR415 = 902 t)
THAL = French ( 878.4 t)
TGV = French TGV (1020 t)
VIRG = British Virgin (748 t)
EURO = eurostar 373/1 (816 t)
TALG = Spanish TALGO AV 2 (680 t)
AVE = Spanish TALGO 350 (842.9 t)
ETRY = Italian ETR-Y 500 (629.6 t)
P2 = Total load (kN)
P3 = Total length (m)
SOFiSTiK2023 3-65ELLA|InputDescription
P4 = equivalent block load (kN/m)
Load values P2 to P3 are informative values only. These load trains will be applied as con-
stant block load in general, but if you specify P4 = 0.0, all individual axles (up to 96!) will be
generated. The speed of the trains will default to the values specified in the EC.
Load trains HSLM of EN1991-2 (Annex E)
Specification: P1 = characterist. Length L-lamda of HSLM-B
or Class of load train (A1 to A10)
Defaults: P2 = Axle loading (kN)
P3 = Number of inner coaches (HSLM-A)
Number of loads (HSLM-B)
P4 = Coach length (D) [ m] for HSLM-A
Distance of loads for HSLM-B [ m]
Load train RL = Railway Loading BS 5400
Figure3.38: LoadtrainRL=RailwayLoadingBS5400
Defaults: P1 = 200 kN
P2 = 50 kN/m
P3 = 25 kN/m
Wind loading: P6 = 1.00 kN/m2
P7 = 3.7 m
Brake loading: P8 = 8.0 kN/m (constant load)
3-66 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Load train ASRT = Railway Loading 300LA according AS 5100
SIMULATED
VEHICLE COUPLER
LOCOMOTIVE
300 kN 300 kN 300 kN 300 kN 360 kN
1.7 1.1 1.7 2.0
300LA RAILWAY TRAFFIC LOADS-AXES LOADS
SIMULATED
VEHICLE
LOCOMOTIVE
12 to 20 12 to 20 12 to 20 12 to 20
(Varies) (Varies) (Varies) (Varies)
Repeat number
of vehicles as
necessary
Figure3.39: LoadtrainASRT=RailwayLoading300LAaccordingAS5100
The load train 300LA of the AS 5100 consists of a locomotive and as many vehicles as nec-
essary, each of them with a variant length between 12 and 20 m. Unfortunately even with
influencelineitishardlypossibletodealwithaninfinitenumberofvariables,thustheloadtrain
has always a finite number of vehicles.
Defaults: P1 = 300 kN (Axle load)
P2 = 360 kN (leading axle load)
P3 = number of vehicles (12)
P4 = fixed length of vehicles (-)
Brake loading: P8 = 100.0 + 15*(L-50) kN (continuous track)
Formorethantowtracks,theloadinginthethirdtrackisappliedwithafactorof0.85,thefourth
track with 0.70 and all other with 0.60.
For this load train different coefficients for dynamic allowances are specified, depending on
the type of the rail fixing. (Ballast or direct fixing). These information is taken from the LANE
definition.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-67ELLA|InputDescription
3.17.15 Military NATO Load Trains (Stanag 2021)
Figure3.40: MilitaryNATOLoadTrains(Stanag2021)
MLC Load trains of the STANAG are given in the sixth edition in appendix A. There are the
classes P1 = 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 30 up to 150. For every class we have available:
P2 = 1 Values from column 4 (Single Axles)
P2 = 2 Values from column 2 (tracked vehicles)
P2 = 3 Values from column 3 (Wheeled vehicles)
3-68 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.18 TRPL – Point Load of load train
Seealso: TRAI,TRBL,LANE,TREX
TRPL
Item Description Unit Default
P Load value of vertical load [kN] 0.0
1190
PB Load value for braking [kN] 0.0
1190
PW Load value transverse (bumping, wind) [kN] 0.0
1190
PF Value of vertical load for centrifugal load [kN] P
1190
PFAC Factor for favourable components − 0.0
DIST A is Minimum (MIN) / absolute (ABS) distance LT ABS
A Distance to last load of train [m] 0.0
1001
DPOS Minimum distance to load refer. point [m] 0.0
1001
DMIN Influence area before [m] 0.0
1001
DMAX Influence area behind [m] 0.0
1001
Y Eccentricity to lane axis ( > 0 = to the right) [m] 0.0
1001
HW Total height of wind attack area [m] 0.0
1001
ZW Height of horizontal force [m] HW/2
1001
HF Height of mass center [m] 0.0
1001
PHI Impact and special options (see remarks) − 1
NW Number of wheels on axle (0-7) − *
B Distance of wheels across the lane [m] 0.0
1001
BW Width of Wheel contact area [m] 0.0
1001
LW Length of wheeel contact area [m] 0.0
1001
SNO Section number for Animation − -
Parameters for multibody dynamics:
FRB Frequency for body Spring Cb 1/sec *
DAB Modal Damping of body support − *
BOGI Load value of bogie −/kN *
FRBO Frequency for bogie Spring Cbo 1/sec *
DABO Modal Damping of bogie support − *
WHEE Load value of wheel −/kN *
FRWH Frequency for wheel spring Cwh 1/sec *
DAWH Modal Damping of wheel support − *
CONT Contact node − -
A freely defined loading by the user comprises an arbitrary number of loads defined relative to
SOFiSTiK2023 3-69ELLA|InputDescription
each other. The first load determines the load reference point (x=0.0). Each further loading
is defined with a distance to the previous one.The distance of the point load to the last load
pointmaybeeitherconstantorvariablewithaminimumvalue. Inthelattercaseandadditional
minimum distance to the load reference point may be defined with DPOS. For the evaluation
in ELLA two additional values DMIN and DMAX may be specified for special cases describing
an influence region before and behind the load.
For the evaluation of the load trains in ELLA symmetric load trains are expected. Thus, any
definitionofYshouldbecomplementedwithaseconddefinitionatthesameposition(A0)with
anegativeY-value. Thus,asecondvalueofY2isnolongersupported. Aneccentricitymaybe
specified with YEX with the load train. NW allows to specify directly a number of wheels with
a distance B for that load element. They loads with the same load value will then add up to a
total axle distributing the loading on all wheels of that axle.
IfNW=0theloadvalueswillbeconvertedtoadistributedloadbasedonthewidthoftheload
train WIDT. (120kN distributed on 3m yield 40kN/m) and will be then clipped at the boundary
of the the current lane width. But there are also cases (KEL of HA in BS), where the load is
distributed over the lane width, which is controlled via PHI.
A definition of BW and LW will allow to create also area loadings for every wheel.
x
A1 > DPOS(4)
A2 A3 A4 A5
Figure3.41: Freelydefinedloadtrain
The loading has a vertical component P, a longitudinal component PB and two components in
transverse direction. The load may be defined either as single point load, as a pair of wheels
(Definition of B < WIDT) or as distributed load (Definition of BW only or B equal to WIDT) The
truedimensionofthewheelcontactareaisonlyusedforCOPYwithinSOFiLOAD,ELLAuses
only the resultant forces for the evaluation of the influence lines.
Positive loadings of PB are braking loads acting in travelling direction, negative values are
intended as accelerating loads in the reverse direction. Loads are applied at the height of the
lane.
The centrifugal loading acts in the height hs, the constant horizontal force in the height zw,
thus creating torsional moments. If the load has a width B, this moment will be applied as a
pair of forces on the lane surface, a torsional moment along the lane axis will be generated
otherwise.
3-70 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
PW h
w
PFSv2/gR
h
s
Figure3.42: Singleloadanditscomponents
With the item OPT several options are controlled:
1 Apply impact factor
2 Multiply vertical load value with UDL-value of design code (eg.BS)
4 Multiply longitudinal load value with value of design code (eg. EN),
8 split load in transverse direction if unfavourable,
16 the load is an area load, the total load value will be adopted to the lane width
32 load is always centric, YEX is not applied
For an analysis with multi-body-dynamics it is possible to generate masses, beams, springs
and dampers via the record TREX. The mass of bogie and wheel may be specified either as a
positive absolute load value or as a negative fraction of the total mass. The default values are
specified with the record TRAI. For more information see record TREX.
Asanalternatemethod,itispossibletoassociatealoadtraintoauserdefinedstructuralmodel
of the load train. In that case CONT specifies the number of a node of the structural system,
which is located at the current position of the load train. If CONT is specified with a positive
number, the node will get the deformations of the structure at this point. If defined negative,
the node will get only the offset of the current position for the visualization however. This has
to be done for all nodes of the train model having no direct contact to the bridge.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-71ELLA|InputDescription
3.19 TRBL – Block Load of Load Train
Seealso: TRAI,TRPL,LANE,TREX
TRBL
Item Description Unit Default
P Loadvalue of vertical load [kN/m] 0.0
1191
PB Loadvalue for braking [kN/m] 0.0
1191
PW Loadvalue in transverse direction [kN/m] 0.0
1191
PF Value of vertical load for centrifugal load [kN/m] P
1191
PFAC Factor for favourable components − 0.0
DIST A is taken as Minimum (MIN) / absolut (ABS) LT ABS
A Distance to last load of train [m] 0.0
1001
L fixed or minimum length of load [m] 0.0
1001
(positive or negative, 0 = unlimited) -
LMAX maximum length of load [m]
1001
LDEL discrete variable length: L + n · LDEL [m] 0.0
1001
Y Excentricity to lane axis ( > 0 = to the right) [m] 0.0
1001
HW Total height of wind attack area [m] 0.0
1001
ZW Height of resulting force PW [m] HW/2
1001
HF Height of mass centre [m] 0.0
1001
PHI Impact and special options (see remarks) − 1
NW Number of tracks on axle (0-2) − *
B Distance of tracks across the lane [m] 0.0
1001
BW Width of track contact area [m] 0.0
1001
SNO Section number for Animation − -
Parameters for multibody dynamics:
FRB Frequency for body Spring Cb 1/sec *
DAB Modal Damping of body support − *
BOGI Load value of bogie −/kN *
FRBO Frequency for bogie Spring Cbo 1/sec *
DABO Modal Damping of bogie support − *
WHEE Load value of wheel −/kN *
FRWH Frequency for wheel spring Cwh 1/sec *
DAWH Modal Damping of wheel support − *
A freely defined loading by the user comprises an arbitrary number of loads defined relative to
each other. The general parameters and remarks are given at record TRPL .
3-72 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
Figure3.43: Blockloading
All load values will be treated as line loads in general. If NW = 0 the load values will be
converted to a distributed load based on the width of the load train WIDT. (12kN/m distributed
on3myield4kN/m2)andwillbethenclippedattheboundaryofthethecurrentlanewidth. For
standardloadtrains,thedefinitionofthecodeisofteninthatformat. Buttherearealsocases,
where the load is distributed over the lane width, which is controlled via PHI.
For NW>0 one or more line loads of the wheels or tracks will be created with the distance B. If
BW is defined, an area load may be created instead of the line load.
If only HW is specified a value for PW will be evaluated from the wind load given with the load
train wind definition.
Input values for multi-body-dynamics of line loads TRBL for record TREX will not be used
currently.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-73ELLA|InputDescription
3.20 SAVE – Saving case for an evaluation
Seealso: POSL,LANE,TRAI,CALC,COMB
SAVE
Item Description Unit Default
LCB Loading case base number − 0
TYPE Action for this Evaluation Lt4 *
TITL Designation of resulting load cases Lt32 -
The input of the loading occurs in the form of saving and evaluation cases. Each saving case
includes several evaluation cases CASE and optional superposition rules of those evaluation
cases COMB.
ThevaluegivenhereatLCBisaddedtothenumberofthecasedefinedwiththerecordCALC.
Example:
CALC defines LMAX 12 and LMIN 11
1. Evaluation of the imposed loads in the construction stage (crane etc.)
SAVE 200
The load cases 211 and 212 are the result.
2. Evaluation of the imposed loads in the final stage
SAVE 250
The load case 261 and 262 are the result.
The action type and the designation of the resulting load cases may be specified explicitly or
be derived from the data saved with the load cases of the used load trains automatically.
3-74 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.21 CASE – Evaluation Case
Seealso: ,POSL,LANE,TRAI,CALC,COMB
CASE
Item Description Unit Default
NO Evaluation Case − 1
GRP Group of Loading LT ALL
Theinputoftheloadingwithinasavingcaseoccursintheformofevaluationcases. Eachcase
gets an identification number and contains the assignement of load trains to individual lanes.
With the input of GRP one may specify literals for load groups. This definition will then select
factors according EN 1991-2 or DIN Fachbericht.
ALL = all load components
GR0 = single vertical loads only
GRU = only vertical distributed loads (UDL+Residual area)
GR1 = vertical loads (gr1 in Table 4.4a)
GR2 = horizontal loads (gr2 in Table 4.4a)
GR2N = non-frequent variant of group 2
GR2F = frequent variant of group 2
GR2L = only longitudinal loads of group 2
GR2T = only transverse loads of group 2
GR20 = only horizontal loads of group 2
GR3 = pedestrian walk (residual) area only (gr3 in Table 4.4a)
GR4 = LM4 / P5 on total traffic area (gr4 in Table 4.4a)
GR5 = special vehicles of LM3 (gr 5 in table 4.4.a)
all other types of load train with its frequent value
GR6 = Exchange of bearings
GR11 = max. vertical 1 according table 6.6 for 1 track
...
GR17 = SW/2
GR21 = max. vertical 1 according table 6.6 for 2 tracks
...
GR27 = SW/2
GR31 = max. vertical 1 according table 6.6 for 3 or more tracks
The loading is generally done within the lanes only. But the load train may be smaller or wider
than the lane or not all lanes will be loaded. Then we have the following rules:
• Loads will be clipped at the edges of the lane
• The residual loading area will be applied for a regular lane on the space between the lane
boundariesandthetruetrafficlanedefinedbytheappliedloadtrain. Howeverforlane0all
otherdefinedlaneswillbespared. Anautomaticextensionoftheresidualareaisnolonger
applied.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-75ELLA|InputDescription
• A loading with group GR4 will apply the residual load on the total traffic area.
3-76 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
3.22 POSL – Position of the Load Trains for an evaluation
Seealso: ,CASE,LANE,TRAI
POSL
Item Description Unit Default
NO Lane (lane_ident.nummer) LT !
e.g. A1.3 = third lane of axis A1
TRAI Loadcase number of load train − !
FACT global factor for loadtrain − 1.0
> 0 is applied to all load values
< 0 is not applied to the residual loading
OPT Longitudinal load train position in lane − FREE
FREE Load train may leave the lane
LANE Area loading only within defined lane
LIM Loadpositionlimitedwithinthelane(crane)
SMIN Minimum start station load reference point − -
SMAX Maximum start station load reference point − -
DEL Optional grid of the start points − -
YEX Eccentricity of the train [m] 0
1001
V Speed of the train [km/h] *
1203
(cid:2)kN/m2(cid:3)
P Residual loading (TRAI)
1192
SYNC Synchronisation of load trains LT OFF
ON All trains move together
OFF trains move individually
PLON Loading in longitudinal direction LT VAR
OFF No loading
POS as defined (pos = braking)
NEG reverse direction (pos = driving)
VAR unfavourable direction
PTRA Loading in transverse direction LT VAR
OFF No loading
POS as defined (pos to the right)
NEG reverse direction (pos to the left)
VAR unfavourable direction
FUGA Zentrifugal loading LT CODE
PHYS according physics
CODE according design code
IMPA Impact factors LT ON
OFF deactivated
ON activated
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-77ELLA|InputDescription
Item Description Unit Default
EXCE Automatic selection of excentricity LT FIX
AUTO activated
FIX deactivated
EXTR Selection of load train position LT ALL
VERT according to vertical loading
ALL according to all load components
With this record the loading within a lane for an evaluation case is defined. You have to spec-
ify at TRAI the load case number of the defined load train and/or the residual loading at P.
Loadings outside of the defined lane width will not be applied.
To specify the superposition of the loading for primary and secondary lanes there are now the
following possibilities:
• Usage of different load trains (e.g. UIC and SSW)
• Definition of global factors in POSL.
• Definition of factors within the final superposition
The record CASE must be followed by the corresponding POSL records. Lanes without load
train remain unloaded.
The program places automatically the loading at the most unfavourable position inside the
above region. To achieve this, all selected points of the load train are placed at up to four
extremes of the influence line. The maximum value of this initial position is used for a detailed
iteration. However, the region can be input for special cases. This is the case, if:
• only one single load position should be analyzed.
input of SMIN=SMAX, DEL without effect
• the load train can not stand in all positions of the influence line.
input of SMIN, SMAX but DEL not defined
• the algorithm does not find the correct extreme positions.
input of SMIN, SMAX and DEL. If DEL is defined <0.0 the Newton search will be deacti-
vated.
In all other cases it is reasonable not to input any values for SMIN, SMAX, or DEL. Only a
single intervall may be used.
Load trains will be positioned at parallel locations in general. If independently moving trains
are required, this needs separate lanes in every case and either separate geometries (eg.
AXA.1 and AXB.1) or a special SYNC OFF definition. Variable load distances will then be
applied as in the main lane. It should be noted that for the case of favorable contributions of
the synchronized load trains, results may be on the unsafe side, especially for a classical load
position analysis.
For a pure beam system, a transverse shift of the loading during the evaluation might be
applicable,forFEstructuressuchaneccentricloadingwillbeproducereasonableresultsonly
in rare cases. Thus it is strongly recommended to define an own lane for each eccentric
3-78 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
loading. ForwideheavyloadtrainsYEXmaybeusedtoshiftthepositionoftheloadtrain,that
onlypartsoftheloadingwhicharewithinthelanelimitswillbeapplied,butthenasynchronized
loading has to be assigned in the adjacent lanes. If there is only a single lane 0, YEX is still
used for historical reasons as a global eccentricity for the total load train.
Elder definitions assembled most options in a single numeric value at OPT:
OPT =PLON + 4 · PTRA + 16 · FUGA + 32 · MPA + 64 · EXCE
+ 128 · OPTS + 1024 · OPTR
ELLA tries to find the maximum forces. The influence of wind on the vehicles is considered
thereforewithasimplifiedmanner: Thewindactsalwaysinthemostunfavorabledirection. The
windonthestructureitselfisnothandledanddetailedeffectslikepartialloading(consideration
oflee),windonpartialvehicles,coherenceorunifiedwinddirectionsatallpartsofthestructure
are also not considered. However, in some case the wind may be defined with a fixed sign.
Thus one may describe a few of these effects.
In the case of a bow of the lane the masses of the load train, usually calculated from the
verticalloads,areusedtogetherwiththevelocityandthecurvatureofthelaneintheplanview
for the calculation of the horizontal loads. Depending on the type of the load train, reductions
or simplified rules may apply.
For the eccentricity there are the following effects, which might be influenced by the EXCE
value:
• Any loading may be eccentric within a given range within the lane. Especially for railway
loadings this is a very important option to select the most unfavorable eccentricity.
• Aloadingmaybesubdividedinarightandleftpartbasedonthetorsionaleffect. Forsome
evaluations (e.g. SLW) a single wheel may become effective in those cases.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-79ELLA|InputDescription
3.23 COMB – Intermediate Combination of Evaluations
Seealso: SAVE,CASE
COMB
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Superposition of this combination LT Q
G permanently acting
Q acting only if unfavourable
A0 Alternative group 0
A1 Alternative group 1
. . .
A9 Alternative group 9
F Additional evaluation case to add
L1 Number / range of evaluation case − -
F1 Factor of an evaluation case − 1.0
L2 Number / range of evaluation case − -
F2 Factor of an evaluation case − 1.0
L3 Number / range of evaluation case − -
F3 Factor of an evaluation case − 1.0
L4 Number / range of evaluation case − -
F4 Factor of an evaluation case − 1.0
L5 Number / range of evaluation case − -
F5 Factor of an evaluation case − 1.0
L6 Number / range of evaluation case − -
F6 Factor of an evaluation case − 1.0
...
L10 Number of an evaluation case − -
F10 Factor of an evaluation case − 1.0
The envelope of extreme values is calculated after the end of evaluation of all the evaluating
cases. Without COMB definitions each evaluation case is mutually exclusive. However for
specialcasesitispossibletodefineintermediateresultswiththeCOMBrecordwhicharethen
combined with variant superposition conditions.
Eachintermediateresulthasasuperpositionruleassignedandiscreatedfromuptotenbasic
evaluation cases with factors. If more than ten cases should be combined, additional records
with COMB F may be used for that purpose.
For the common case that a combination of multiple lanes is required with either different type
ofloadtrainsorwithdifferentglobalfactors,aninternalsortingmaybeperformedbyspecifying
a range of case numbers "cmin:cmax". In that case only loadings are considered not having
3-80 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|ELLA
loads in any already loaded lane.
Examples:
COMB A0 F1 1.0 F2 0.6 F3 0.4 combines any 3 cases such that the
most unfavourable will be taken with
100 %, the second with 60 % and the
least unfavourable with 40 %
COMB A0 L1 1 1.0 2:9 0.6 2:9 0.4 combines case 1 to 100 % with 60 %
of the largest of the cases 2 to 9
and 40 % of highest remaining case.
Example:
A railway bridge with 3 tracks and 2 spans with 8.00 and 12.00 m length has to be ana-
lyzed. According to DS 804 are to be examined:
2 tracks with UIC 71 100% or
3 tracks with UIC 71 71% or
2 tracks with SW 100% or
1 track with SSW and 1 track with UIC 71
The following input is possible for the definition and the superposition of the four combinations
based on nine evaluation cases:
LC 1001 ; TRAI UIC
LC 1002 ; TRAI SW
LC 1003 ; TRAI SSW
CASE 1 ; POSL 1 1001 ! UIC
CASE 2 ; PSOL 2 1001
CASE 3 ; POSL 3 1001
CASE 4 ; POSL 1 1002 ! SW
CASE 5 ; POSL 2 1002
CASE 6 ; POSL 3 1002
CASE 7 ; POSL 1 1003 ! SSW
CASE 8 ; POSL 2 1003
CASE 9 ; POSL 3 1003
COMB A0 1:3 1.00 1:3 1.00 $ ANY TWO TRACKS WITH UIC
A0 1 0.71 2 0.71 3 0.71 $ THREE TRACKS WITH REDUCED UIC
A0 4:6 1.00 4:6 1.00 $ ANY TWO TRACKS WITH SW
A0 7:9 1.00 1:3 1.00 $ ANY TRACK WITH SSW AND A 2ND UIC
SOFiSTiK2023 3-81ELLA|InputDescription
3-82 SOFiSTiK2023OutputDescription|ELLA
4 Output Description
Theoutputofaninfluencelineevaluationcanbecomeveryextensive. Thereforetheuseofthe
various ECHO options may be very helpful.
4.1 Lane Geometry
The geometry of the lanes can be controlled with ECHO LINE. The default output results in a
table for each lane with the following information in its headline:
DY Influence width of the lane, see record LSEL
DZ Influence height of the lane, see record LSEL
Load distribution, see record LSEL
The table contains the following columns:
STATION Station parameters of the lane
COORDINATES X,Y,Z Coordinates of the station at the lane
SECTION LENGTH Distance of the following section to the
next station
REMARKS Data for geometry, radius, clothoidal etc.
With ECHO LINE FULL one obtains a list of the neighbouring nodes at the left-hand side and
to the right-hand side of the lane.
4.2 Influence Lines
Influence lines can be represented and printed graphically. However, an output occurs only, if
the lines have been selected with SHOW, and ECHO IL has not been set equal to NO. The
graphical output is obtained only by using the record SIZE, whilst the output in the form of
tables is obtained with ECHO IL FULL.
Thetableoftheinfluencelinescontainsinitsheadlinetheapplicationpointoftheunitloadand
the scalar variable. The columns are as follows:
X-VALUE X coordinate measured at the lane axis,
beginning with 0.000 m
PV-VALUE Influence line value for vertical loading
atthelaneaxisresp. themeanvaluefortwotrans-
verse wheel loadings
MS-VALUE Influence line value for torsional loading
PS-VALUE Influence line value for longitudinal loading
(brake load)
PQ-VALUE Influence line value for lateral loading
SOFiSTiK2023 4-1ELLA|OutputDescription
(wind, centrifugal force)
dPV/ds First derivative of the influence line values
PV (corresponds to IL for -M loading)
p+,p- Integrals of positive and negative influence values
for INT>2
r+,r- Integrals of influence values in the right and left
residual areas for INT>2
Influence lines are plotted with a predetermined scale in the longitudinal direction and with a
scale for the influence line values, which is determined by the height of the drawing bands.
Maximum and minimum values are printed at the plot.
Forthegraphicsofthetransverseinfluenceline,thesumoftheinfluencevaluesofthethetwo
wheelsoftheaxle(Pv)andtheintegralsofthepositive(p+)andnegative(p-)influencevalues
are also given. The values r+ and r- are the integrals of the residual areas outside the traffic
lane.
4.3 Load Trains
The load trains are described in plain text with their parameters. The output of the corre-
sponding table can be suppressed with ECHO TYPL NO; with ECHO TYPL FULL the table is
expanded in order to show the generated loadings. This table is also printed for user defined
loadings by entering ECHO TYPL YES.
This table contains the following columns:
TYPE Load type
E Point load
E-0 Point load without dynamic factor
G Distributed load
G-0 Distributed load without dynamic
factor
UDL Distributed load with variable value
according to BS 5400
PV Vertical load value
PL Load value in the lane direction (brake)
PW Load value in lateral direction (wind)
PFUG Load value for centrifugal force
PFAK Factor for favourably acting components
X Load position
L Length of the load for distributed loads
LDEL Subdivision of the length of the load
Y Load eccentricity
HW Height of the gravity centre for wind loads
4-2 SOFiSTiK2023OutputDescription|ELLA
HF Height of the gravity centre for centrifugal
forces
For loads with variable length the output of a second line with the maximum and the minimum
length and a possible subdivision length value in the column LDEL follows.
The dynamic factors and the lane widths are output in an additional table. The parameters
therein mean:
STARTING first station value
ENDING second station value
PHIB dynamic factor for unfavourable bending
PHI2 dynamic factor for favourable bending
PHIS dynamic factor for unfavourable shear
PHI4 dynamic factor for favourable shear
LPHI determinant length
YRA lane boundary to the right of first station
YLA lane boundary to the left of first station
YRE lane boundary to the right of second station
YLE lane boundary to the left of second station
4.4 Superposition Combinations
Atableofthesuperpositioncombinationsalwaysappearswhensuchcombinationshavebeen
defined. A single line is printed for each combination containing its type as well as the partici-
pated evaluation cases with their factors.
4.5 Evaluation Results
The evaluation results are controlled by the two ECHO options EVAL and RES.
When one of these two options is active, a line which contains the identification of the position
is printed for each position with corresponding influence lines.
AslongasEVALisactive,thepositionoftheloadtrainaswellasthepossibleconvoydistances
or the variable lengths are output in a succeeding table.
If EVAL is set to FULL, the regions with different signs are printed then for each evaluation
case and for each lane together with the applied dynamic factors PHI1/PHI2 for unfavourably/-
favourably acting loading and the positions of extreme values.
If RES is active, the extreme values of the internal forces or other parameters are output in
an additional table. The first columns contain the number, with which the load case has to be
SOFiSTiK2023 4-3ELLA|OutputDescription
stored, and a text for the designation the evaluation rule.
4.6 Program Statistics
IftheECHOoptionSTATisused,onereceivesanoutputwhichshowstheusedCPUtimeand
the up to now needed memory allocation at the screen or in the logfile for each part of the
program. These values are important, in order to allow an estimation of the memory and the
CPU time requirements for larger examples.
4-4 SOFiSTiK2023