HASE
Half-Space Analysis for Static Soil-Structure Inter-
action
SOFiSTiK | 2023HASE
Half-SpaceAnalysisforStaticSoil-StructureInteraction
HASEManual,ServicePack2023-3Build88
Copyright©2023 bySOFiSTiKAG,Nuremberg,Germany.
SOFiSTiKAG
HQNuremberg OfficeGarching
Flataustraße14 Parkring2
90411Nürnberg 85748GarchingbeiMünchen
Germany Germany
T+49(0)91139901-0 T+49(0)89315878-0
F+49(0)911397904 F+49(0)89315878-23
info@sofistik.com
www.sofistik.com
Thismanualisprotectedbycopyrightlaws. Nopartofitmaybetranslated,copiedorreproduced,inanyformorby
anymeans,withoutwrittenpermissionfromSOFiSTiKAG.SOFiSTiKreservestherighttomodifyortorelease
neweditionsofthismanual.
Themanualandtheprogramhavebeenthoroughlycheckedforerrors. However,SOFiSTiKdoesnotclaimthat
eitheroneiscompletelyerrorfree. Errorsandomissionsarecorrectedassoonastheyaredetected.
Theuseroftheprogramissolelyresponsiblefortheapplications. Westronglyencouragetheusertotestthe
correctnessofallcalculationsatleastbyrandomsampling.
FrontCover
Volkstheater,Munich Photo:FlorianSchreiberContents|HASE
Contents
Contents i
1 Task Description 1-1
2 Theoretical Principles 2-1
2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.2 Soil Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.3 Soil Profile Interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.4 Stresses in the Half-Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-4
2.5 Strains and Displacements in the Half-Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-6
2.5.1 Method according to Boussinesq. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-6
2.5.2 Classical Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-7
2.6 Horizontal Stiffness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-7
2.7 Variable z level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-7
2.8 Piles in the Half-Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-9
2.8.1 PILE - internal HASE Piles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-9
2.8.2 XPIL - Extended Piles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-9
2.9 Limits and CPU Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-10
2.10 Files and Combination with Static Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-11
3 Input Description 3-1
3.1 Input Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
3.2 Input Records. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-2
3.3 CTRL – Control of the Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-3
3.4 GRP – Selection of Element Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-4
3.5 HALF – Halfspace Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-5
3.6 BORE – Selection of Bore Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-6
3.7 PILE – Internal Piles in the Halfspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-7
3.8 PLAS – Plasticizing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-9
3.9 LOAR – Load Radii . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-11
3.10 LC – Load Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-12
3.11 LOAD – Single Loads. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-14
3.12 SELE – Results Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-15
3.13 SELP – Selection of the Plot Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-16
3.14 ECHO – Output Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-19
4 Output Description 4-1
4.1 Check List for Bore Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
4.2 Soil Parameters at the Nodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
4.3 Half-Space Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
4.4 Pile Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
SOFiSTiK2023 iHASE|Contents
4.5 Check List for Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
4.6 Check List for Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
4.7 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-3
5 Examples 5-1
5.1 Base Plate Calculated with Stiffness Coefficient Method . . . . . . . . . . 5-2
5.2 Constant Soil Pofile - Three-dimensional Frame with a Plate . . . . . . . . 5-7
5.3 Interpolation with Weight Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-12
5.4 Stresses in the Halfspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-16
5.5 Pile-Slab Foundation with Extended Piles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-18
Bibliography 5-21
ii SOFiSTiK2023TaskDescription|HASE
1 Task Description
Oneofthewaystomodelthestaticsoil-structureinteractionistomodelthesoilaccordingtothe
Winkler assumption. This method is relatively simple to use but cannot take into consideration
the shear deformations within the soil.
One of the most accurate methods is to model the soil using 3D finite elements. This however
requires a huge number of soil elements which in many cases can sever times exceed the
number of elements needed for modeling of the structure itself, which is usually the main part
of interest for structural engineers.
In HASE module a sub-structuring technique, in which the structure will be represented using
standard finite elements, while the soil will be modeled semi-analytically using the half-space
theory, is adopted. The connection between the two substructures will be assured by stiff-
ness/flexibility coefficients at the soil-structure interface nodes. This method overcomes the
problemsoftheothertwotechniques. Ittakesintoconsiderationthesheardeformationswithin
the soil and it does not require explicit discreet modeling of the entire soil domain.
Based on the halfspace theory, module HASE calculates the stiffness matrix representing the
soil part of the static soil-structure interaction system. The soil- structure interaction analysis
itself is then preformed in module ASE, in which the soil stiffness matrix is linked with the
structurepartandtheresponseoftheentiresystemundertheprescribedloadsiscalculated.
Once the static analysis is finished, HASE can be used for post-processing to determine
stresses and settlements of the half-space (soil) due to the supporting forces calculated in
thestaticanalysis. ItisalsopossibletoperformindependentsettlementanalysiswithinHASE,
where the loads are directly applied to the half- space.
It is possible to define layered half-space with soil parameters and layer thickness varying
in vertical as well as in the radial direction. Therefore each point at the soil-structure inter-
face can have different soil-parameters associated to it. This is achieved by interpolating the
soil-properties and layer thicknesses from the defined bore profiles. There are following inter-
polation schemes available:
1. CONS - Constant soil profile at all the points of the half-space
2. QUAD - Bilinear interpolation of a separate system containing a discretised model of the
soil
3. COOR - Interpolation of bore profiles using weight functions
4. LAYR-Interpolationofthesoilpropertiesfromthe3Dtriangularprismmeshmodelofthe
layered half-space defined by the bore profile distribution on the half-space surface
Thestiffnessmatrixdoesnotneedtobefullinordertobeprocessed. Therefore,theinfluence
of points which are far away from each other (i.e., their distance is above a predefined limit)
can be ignored to reduce CPU time.
In the basic version of HASE, the program processes halfspace problems for plane slab struc-
tures. Thehalfspaceforthree-dimensionalsystemsisonlyavailableintheexpandedversion.
SOFiSTiK2023 1-1HASE|TaskDescription
1-2 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|HASE
2 Theoretical Principles
2.1 Introduction
The program HASE first determines the flexibility matrix. This describes the displacement
of a point  due to a force on the point k within the half-space. The inverse of the flexibility
matrix is the stiffness matrix. The entire calculation consists of five main parts (Bellmann and
Radmanovic´ [1]):
1. Calculation of the soil-profile distribution in the plan view
2. Calculation of the flexibility matrix
3. Inversion and storage of the stiffness matrix
4. Static calculation including structural elements
5. Determination of the stresses in the soil due to the calculated displacements.
Thesteps1,2,3and5areexecutedbyHASE.ThethirdstepisthemostcostlyintermsofCPU
time, accounting for up to 90% of the entire CPU time. However, for a given system, Step 3
need only be calculated once.
For a half-space analysis with a small or sparse stiffness matrix, Step 3 does not necessarily
have to be performed by HASE.
Requirements:
• analysis of each loadcase separately in ASE with SYST PROB NONL and STEX NONL 1
Then ASE has to iteratively obtain stiffnesses from the half-space, but it can use the sparse
solver much more efficiently and is therefore much faster for certain large systems. In this
case,theinversionoftheflexibilitymatrixinHASEcanbeswitchedoffwithCTRLSOLVNONL,
because the flexibility matrix is not used. For an example, see hase2.dat.
A previously generated half-space matrix can simply be reused after a modification to the
system. A new calculation of the stiffness matrix is only necessary if the coordinates or the
numbering of the contact nodes to the half-space have been changed.
2.2 Soil Profile
The soil bore profiles position and inclinations are defined in AQUA with the record BORE.
Stiffness and resistance soil properties as well as the layer disposition along the bore profile
axis are defined using BLAY record. The start depth of the first layer of the bore profile should
beonthesurfaceofthehalf-space(recordHALFitemZ).Ifthehalf-spacesurfaceisbelowthe
start depth of a bore profile a warning message will appear. If the half-space surface is above
the start depth of a bore profile an error message will appear.
2.3 Soil Profile Interpolation
It is possible to define layered half-space with soil parameters and layer thickness varying
in vertical as well as in the radial direction. Therefore each point at the soil-structure inter-
face can have different soil-parameters associated to it. This is achieved by interpolating the
SOFiSTiK2023 2-1HASE|TheoreticalPrinciples
soil-properties and layer thicknesses from the defined bore profiles. There are following inter-
polation schemes available:
1. CONS - Constant soil profile at all the points of the half-space
2. QUAD - Bilinear interpolation of a separate system containing a discretized model of the
soil
3. COOR - Interpolation of bore profiles using weight functions
4. LAYR-Interpolationofthesoilpropertiesfromthe3Dtriangularprismmeshmodelofthe
layered half-space defined by the bore profile distribution on the half-space surface
In the 2nd case (QUAD) an arbitrary mesh of QUAD elements (system 2) has to be defined.
Thecontoursofthesoilprofilearedescribedbyinformationstoredatthenodesofthissecond
mesh. The soil characteristics are then interpolated bilinearly from the QUAD elements of
system 2 to the nodes of the structure in the primary system (structure node A is situated in
QUADelementXofsystem2;thesoilcharacteristicsofAaredeterminedfromthefourcorner
profiles of the element X). In this way, irregular soil profile distributions can be defined easily.
Also,thesoilprofiledefinitionisindependentofthenumberingandorganizationofthestructure
contained in the primary system.
In the 3rd case (COOR), vertical soil profiles are defined at coordinates (X 1,Y 1) to (X np,Y np).
Next,thesoilcharacteristicsofthenodesarecalculatedasthesuperpositionofallboreprofile
propertiescmultipliedbyaweightfactorEPspecifiedintherecordHALF.Asarule,thecloser
(REP
a profile, the stronger its influence on a node ) is:

   
1 np (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)EP 1 np (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)EP
(cid:88) (cid:88)
=  ·  /   (2.1)
c R c R
=1   =1 
With this method, a variable soil profile distribution can be implemented quickly without the
need for a secondary mesh. The bore profile input records can be easily inferred from the
building site soil report.
2-2 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|HASE
Figure 2.1: LAYR interpolation method: (a) Triangulation of the bore profile points at the half-
space surface (b) 3D geometric model of the half-space obtained by the extrusion of the surface
mesh along the axes of the bore profiles. In the example bore profiles have 3 layers with different
thicknesses.
Fourth method (LAYR) first constructs the triangular mesh on the surface of the half-space
from the defined bore-profiles (Figure 2.1a). Next this mesh is extruded along the axes of
bore profiles to construct the three-dimensional mesh of triangular prisms, defining discreet
soil (half-space) domain (Figure 2.1b). In this way soil-properties at the corner nodes of the
triangularprismareexactlythosedefinedbythecorrespondingBORE+BLAYrecordinAQUA.
Stiffness and resistance properties within a prism are interpolated using hierarchical shape
functions(linearintheradial,quadraticintheverticaldirection). Variationofthesoil-properties
along the BORE axis defined in the BLAY record is preserved. Geometry of the 3D prism
mesh is saved in an additional *CDB. The prisms are only used for the interpolation of the
definedsoilproperties; theyarenotusedforthecomputationofthestiffnessmatrixofthesoil.
Stresses and deformations and therefore the stiffness matrix are determined using the half-
space theory (see Sections 2.4 and 2.5). All nodes that belong to the structure-soil interface
(foundation plate, piles) must be entirely encompassed within defined half-space domain.
Restrictions:
• Minimum 3 bore profiles, whose start points describe a convex polygon.
• For inclined bore profiles: intersection of the sides of prisms should be avoided.
When specifying different soil characteristics in the plan view, the number of layers must be
the same in all bore profiles. The layer thicknesses can vary, however. The values ES, MUE,
PMAX, PMAL, C and PHI as well as the layer thicknesses are then interpolated according to
either method 2, 3 or 4.
If there is a large difference between the stiffness of two adjacent soil layers, numerical prob-
lems may result. Then half-space theory is no longer applicable, and an error message is
printed.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-3HASE|TheoreticalPrinciples
2.4 Stresses in the Half-Space
The stresses in the half-space due to a static load are calculated using classic half-space
theory.
The loads are distributed about the nodes over a predefined load area centered at the node.
Theloadareaforeachnodeisassumedtobeacirclewitharadiusr. Theloadradiiofthenodes
are determined automatically by summing a fraction of the area of each adjacent rectangular
element. For frame and girder systems, the respective load radii (foundation measurements)
must be defined manually. For X-piles, the load radii are determined from the cross-sections
of the piles.
σ
o
r
X
σ
z
y z
z
Figure 2.2: Stresses in vertical direction σ z under a center point of the circular pressure load σ o
actingonthehalf-spacesurface.
Thestressesforpointsontheverticallineunderacenterpointoftheuniformcircularpressure
load are computed according to formula (Smoltczyk [2])
(cid:150) (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)3/2(cid:153)
σ z =σ 0· 1− , (2.2)
1+r2/z2
where r is the load radius (see previous paragraph), while σ 0 represents circular pressure
obtained by dividing the point load with the load area r2π (see Figure 2.3).
2-4 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|HASE
P
z˙
x x
r
Rˇ
R
z y z
z = z˙
y
R
(x,y,z) (x,y,z)
P
z σ σ
z z
(a) (b)
Figure 2.3: Stresses in vertical direction σ z under a center point of the circular pressure load σ o
actingonthehalf-spacesurface.
To determine the stresses of the points outside of the circular load area, the load is treated as
apointload. Forthepointload P k actingonthesurfaceofthehalf-spacethefollowingformula
for the vertical stress σ z in the point  applies (Figure 2.3) (Smoltczyk [2] and Boussinesq [3]):
3P z3
k
σ z, = , (2.3)
2πR5
where,y,andzrepresentthecoordinatesoftheobservedpointwithinthehalf-space,mea-
sured from the point of load introduction at the half-space surface, while R=(cid:198) 2+y2+z2.
The sum of principal stresses σ p =σ +σ y+σ z also given by the Boussinesq [3] equation:
(1+ν)·P ·z
k
σ p, = , (2.4)
πR3
where ν is the Poisson’s ratio.
Similarly for point loads P acting within the half-space (pile foot force or pile skin friction),
vertical stresses σ z are computed as (Smoltczyk [2]):
3P (cid:26) 1
(cid:0)ζ−ζ¯(cid:1)3 (cid:104) (3−4ν)ζ(cid:0)ζ+ζ¯(cid:1)2 −ζ¯(cid:0)ζ+ζ¯(cid:1)(cid:0)5ζ−ζ¯(cid:1)(cid:105)
σ = · + +
z
8πR2(1−ν) ρ3
10 (1−2ν) (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)(cid:27)
+ ζζ¯(cid:0)ζ+ζ¯(cid:1)3 − (cid:0)ζ−ζ¯(cid:1) −1 , (2.5)
ρ7 3 ρ3
where ν = 0.35 (taken as a fixed value), ζ = z/R,ζ¯= z¯/R and ρ = R¯/R. The meaning of z, R
R¯
and is explained in the Figure 2.3b. In general, this formula produces some tensile stresses
in the half-space.
For the points in the transition zone (inside of the circular area, excluding the center) interpo-
lation of the formulas 2.2 and 2.3, 2.4 is applied.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-5HASE|TheoreticalPrinciples
These stress formulas are used for the determination of the strains and consequently the set-
tlings of the soil.
Stresses at any depths can be stored and plotted with the record SELP.
2.5 Strains and Displacements in the Half-Space
In the Boussinesq [3] method, the settlings are determined including an effect of the Poisson’s
ratio ν. This method is especially useful for undrained clay with a high Poisson’s ratio. The
calculation of strains takes besides the vertical stresses σ z(z), the sum of principal stresses
σ p(z), and thus implicitly the horizontal stresses, into an account:
(cid:90) z¯
s z,(z¯)= ε z,(z)dz. (2.6)
z
m
P
k
i x
k ϵ z,(z) S z,(z)
S (z)
z,
z
Figure2.4: Verticalstrainε z(z)anddisplacements z(z)alongtheverticallineinpointduetothe
loadP atpointk
k
There are two methods for computation of strains and consequently displacements available
in HASE - classical method and method according to Boussinesq.
2.5.1 Method according to Boussinesq
In the Boussinesq [3] method, the settlings are determined including an effect of the Poisson’s
ratio ν. This method is especially useful for undrained clay with a high Poisson’s ratio. The
calculation of strains takes besides the vertical stresses σ z(z), the sum of principal stresses
σ p(z), and thus implicitly the horizontal stresses, into an account:
1
ε z(z)= (cid:2)(1+ν)·σ z(z)−ν·σ p(z)(cid:3). (2.7)
E(z)
The method according to Boussinesq is activated when the Poisson’s ratio MUE is defined
within BLAY record and larger than zero, e.g.:
+PROG AQUA
HEAD
!...
BORE ...
BLAY ... ES 15000 MUE 0.4
2-6 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|HASE
!...
END
Example - hase13_boussinesq.dat
Once the Boussinesq method is activated, HASE sets the minimal Poisson’s ratio to 0.2. The
input BLAY ES is still interpreted as stiffness modulus E s! Also using a material input MNO
in BLAY MNO, the value E in MAT...E is interpreted as stiffness property E s, nevertheless if
MAT...MUE is defined or not.
2.5.2 Classical Method
Since the Poisson’s ration of the soil is hard to define and not a constant value, in most of
the practical applications the Poisson’s ratio is directly taken into consideration by using the
stiffnessmodulus E s insteadoftheelasticitymodulus E (Smoltczyk[2]). For ν=0 bothmoduli
are formally identical:
(1−ν)
E s =E· . (2.8)
(1+ν)(1−2ν)
Theverticalstrainsε z cannowbeobtainedbysimplydividingverticalstressesσ z withstiffness
modulus E s, i.e.
σ (z)
z
ε z(z)= . (2.9)
E (z)
s
This method is activated when Poisson’s ratio MUE in BLAY record is not defined or is equal
to zero.
2.6 Horizontal Stiffness
In addition to the vertical stiffness normally used in the description of the half-space, a hori-
zontal stiffness can also be calculated and stored. This stiffness can be used to describe the
horizontal fixities of the structure and must be given if no other horizontal fixities are defined.
The horizontal stiffness is determined simply as a proportion of the vertical stiffness. If not
specified in the record HALF no horizontal stiffness is stored.
Verticalwallsarenottakenintoaccountinthehorizontalstiffnessastheyareshadowedforthe
more important z action - see next chapter. So horizontally only the lower bottom slabs work
on friction as well as enbedded beams (external piles).
Acalculationofthree-dimensionalsystemsispossibleonlyintheexpandedversionofHASE.
2.7 Variable z level
With the default HALF ZVAR AUTO also systems with quad halfspace contact on variable z
level can be analyzed, see example hase3_variable_surface_level.dat
Actually the halfspace theory is no longer valid exactly in such a case, but nevertheless the
analysis with HASE also gives big advantages compared to a simple quad bedding. Because
SOFiSTiK2023 2-7HASE|TheoreticalPrinciples
also in case of variable z level, e.g. a load on a bottom slab at z level 4m causes a settlement
in a neighboring bottom slab at z level 8m, and the other way round, = interaction in the HASE
stiffness coefficient method. HASE tries to scale the stiffnesses to get good results also if the
quad halfspace contact acts on variable z levels.
In principle, in case a quad bottom slab lies under the halfspace surface, all under 60 degree
higher nodes above will not get a halfspace contact. According the following figure, from the
lower bottom slab a shadow is assumed under an angle of 60 degree to switch off nodes
above:
60°
Figure 2.5: Typical cellar situation: shadowing 60 degree, red=active halfspace nodes, green=no
halfspacecontactassumed
The soil in the angle of the cellar wall and the upper slab (green shaded) is inactive and just
followsthedeformationoftheupperslabandthewall. TocheckthiseffectoftheZVARmethod
please plot the bedding stress as iso-area and you will immediately see this shadowing.
Ifnoshadowingoccurs,allbottomslabsworkasiftheywouldstandonthetopofthehalfspace.
This es e.g. the case if the right abutment of a bridge has another l level as the left one but
bothlieonthesurroundingterrainsurface. Sotheprogramlooksaroundabottomslabifthere
are other higher bottom slabs around:
- if yes, the deep bottom slab is assumed to lie inside the halfspace
- if no, the bottom slab is assumed to lie on top of the surface (uses a separate surface level)
So with HALF-Z you mainly define, which elements will definitely not get a halfspace contact
(all elements above HALF-Z).
InthefollowingexampleyousetHALF-Ztotheleveloftheleftbottomslab(redline). Asinthe
nearer surrounding of the right bottom slab no other higher halfspace contact is found, a local
halfspace surface is assumed there (green). The same happens at the middle support with
enbedded piles. So this represents the brown environmental surface.
2-8 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|HASE
Figure2.6: Independanthalfspacesurfaces
2.8 Piles in the Half-Space
TherearetwowaystomodelmodelloadintroductionbymeansofpilesinHASE–as internal
HASE-piles (PILE) or as extended piles (XPIL).
InternalHASE-pilesarenotdiscretizedinthefiniteelementsystem. Theyareapropertyofthe
halfspace and defined with command PILE. Example - hase8_intern_piles.dat
Extended piles are real beam elements in the system and thus need not to be defined with
command PILE. Example - hase22_abutment_extended_piles.dat
2.8.1 PILE - internal HASE Piles
Internal HASE Piles are no ream beam elememts and may be included as part of the calcula-
tion of the stiffness matrix at the halfspace surface. In the linear calculation, it is assumed that
MANT times the total pile load is transferred by pile skin friction (literal MANT in record PILE)
and the rest as point pressure at the foot of the pile.
The part of load supported by skin friction is evenly distributed, relative to the soil stiffnesses
along the pile, over the length of the pile and integrated numerically.
Loads introduced within the half-space are calculated according to equation 2.5.
Piles within the half-space can only be calculated in the expanded version of HASE.
2.8.2 XPIL - Extended Piles
Piles are defined as beam-elements in the system that lie below the halfspace surface. In
HASE, the stiffnesses of all beam nodes are obtained using the formula 2.5.
InHASE,itispossibletodirectlyincludetheeffectsofsoilbeddingonapile-beddedstructure,
where piles are modeled as discrete beam elements and are part of the structure. The GRP
record can be used to select beam groups where stiffness values should be calculated within
the halfspace. In contrast to the PILE functionality, which condenses the total effect of the pile
toasinglestiffnessatthepointwherethepileisattachedtothestructure,eachnodealongan
extendedpilerepresentsexplicitdegreesoffreedomwithinthehalfspace. Thisallowsbedding
effects to be represented continuously along the pile.
The effective soil stiffness properties along X-pile are always determined from the half-space
stiffness defined using bore profiles.
IfadditionalnonlinearresistanceeffectsalongX-pilearetobeconsidered,thiscanbedoneby
one of the following:
SOFiSTiK2023 2-9HASE|TheoreticalPrinciples
1. Definition of the nonlinear resistance properties for each individual pile directly. If you
do not need to give an individual nonlinear effect to every pile, the second method is
recommended! If you need individual nonlinear effects this can be achieved by:
• defining bedding profiles containing nonlinear specific information using BORE +
BBAX or BBLA
• assigning these profiles directly to the corresponding X-pile beams at system input
The following X-pile nonlinear effects can be taken into account when performing a non-
linear analysis in combination with ASE:
• maximum pile skin friction along the pile C0 (see AQUA record BBAX)
• maximum axial pile foot force PMAX (see AQUA record BBAX)
• maximum transverse compression PMA1 and PMA2 (see AQUA record BBLA)
2. Interpolation of the nonlinear resistance properties from the corresponding soil parame-
ters of the defined bore profile distribution. The length of the piles within halfspace, the
pile diameter and pile circumference are automatically taken into consideration for the
evaluation of the pile specific values. This method is achieved by:
• definingthesoilnonlinearresistancepropertiesusingAQUArecordsBOREandBLAY
• interpolating these properties using one of four interpolation schemes described in
Section 2.3
The X-pile nonlinear resistance properties that are interpolated in this way are maximum
pressure at pile foot (PMAX), maximum lateral pressure (PMAL), cohesion (C) and soil-
pile friction angle.
Method 2 is a preferred method for the definition of X-pile resistance properties. Example:
hase21_kpp_extended_piles.dat
2.9 Limits and CPU Time
The following limits should be observed:
Number of bore profiles : 999
Number of system nodes : 999999
Number of halfspace nodes : 65000
Greatest node number : 999999
Further limits are imposed by HASE and also by the computer hardware.
The stiffness matrix must be determined by inverting the flexibility matrix. In this case, the
system of equations must be solved n times (where n = number of nodes in halfspace). By
comparison, in ASE the system of equations must be solved for a load case only 1 time, but
for m unknowns (for the plate this is m=3n, as each node has 3 unknowns).
Because the inversion step costs a lot of CPU time, it is executed only in-core, that means
exclusively in the main memory. Therefore the number of nodes which can be calculated
depends on the size of main memory available. It also depends on the band width of the
system of equations. This can be reduced by lowering the influence radius with the record
CTRL INFL. Reducing bandwidth naturally reduces CPU time. The memory requirements can
be estimated with the following diagram. The curves I to IV show different influence radii:
2-10 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|HASE
Curve I : Influence radius = 999m
Curve II : Influence radius = 30% of the system dimension
Curve III : Influence radius = 10% of the system dimension
Curve IV : Influence radius = 3% of the system dimension
I
II
16 MB
III
12 MB
IV
8 MB
4 MB
Number of nodes
500 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Figure2.7: Memoryrequirement
Example:
A square plate with 16m16m and 4040 elements (4141 = 1681 nodes) needs approxi-
mately 6− 7MB main memory for an influence radius of 4.80m(= 30% of 16m). With 4MB
main memory, the problem can be processed with a maximum influence radius of approxi-
mately 3.00m.
2.10 Files and Combination with Static Programs
The stiffness of the halfspace is saved by HASE in the file PROJECT.$E2.
At the start of the following statics program (ASE), this $E2-file is read in using the command
STEX. The stiffness of the superstructure is then combined with the stiffness matrix of the
halfspace to form a total stiffness matrix. The system of equations is solved and saved as
PROJEKT.$D1.
The default argument of the STEX command is PROJECT.$E2, so the input of STEX without
anyargumentisgenerallysufficient. Becausethecontactnodesofthehalfspaceareassigned
external node numbers, any other $E2-file may alternatively be specified.
In the following statics calculation, load cases can quickly be computed without having to re-
solve the system of equations. The STEX command need only be specified once for multiple
load cases. No group selection is allowed. If material values or similar values used as inputs
to HASE are modified, the system of equations must be set up and solved again in HASE.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-11HASE|TheoreticalPrinciples
2-12 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3 Input Description
3.1 Input Language
Input is written in text using the free format of the CADINP input language (see the general
manual ’SOFiSTiK Basics’).
Three categories of units are distinguished:
mm Fixed unit. Input is always required in the specified unit.
[mm] Explicit unit. Input defaults to the specified unit. Alternatively, an explicit as-
signment of a related unit is possible (eg. 2.5[m] ).
[mm] Implicit unit. Implicit units are categorised semantically and denoted by a cor-
1011
responding identity number (shown in green). Valid categories referring to the
unit ”length” are, for example, geodetic elevation, section length and thickness.
Thedefaultunitforeachcategoryisdefinedbythecurrentlyactive(designcode
specific) unit set. This input default can be overridden as described above. The
specified unit in square brackets corresponds to the default for unit set 5 (Eu-
rocodes, NORM UNIT 5).
SOFiSTiK2023 3-1HASE|InputDescription
3.2 Input Records
Previously defined material values may be modified in HASE.
TheinputisorderedinblockswhichareterminatedbyanENDrecord. Aparticularsystemora
loadcasecanbeanalyzedwithineachblock. Theprogramendsifanemptyblock(END/END)
is found.
The following records are defined:
Record Items
CTRL OPT VAL
GRP NO VAL FOOT RC CC
HALF TYPE PROF EP Z FAKX FAKY FAKZ
NAME
BORE NO
PILE X Y D0 D Z MANT ZMAN
PMAM PMAF MNO TITL
PLAS PMAX
LOAR NO R
LC NO NAME TITL STVZ
LOAD NO PZ
SELE NO Z
SELP Z LCST BRIC DX DY HMIN
ECHO OPT VAL
TherecordsHEAD,ENDandPAGEaredescribedinthegeneralmanualSOFiSTiK:”Basics”.
3-2 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3.3 CTRL – Control of the Analysis Method
Seealso: HALF,PLAS
CTRL
Item Description Unit Default
OPT Control option LT -
INFL Influence radius for band width reduction
TOLS Minimum stiffness cutoff
GAUS Number of Gauss points per integration
layer
SOLV 0/Linear/Nonlinear
FAKU Ignore tension caused by pile forces
WARN Switch off error messages
VAL Value of the option − -
INFL NodeswhichliemorethanINFLmfromeachotherhavenoinfluenceoneachother.
Withthisoption,theCPUtimecanbereduceddrasticallyforbigsystems. Default =
999 m
TOLS Stiffnesses which are smaller than TOLS times the maximum stiffness are not
saved, but rather replaced by zero. Default = 1.E-6
GAUS Number of Gauss points per integration layer
The program automatically divides thick soil layers into thinner layers to produce a
more accurate integration of the strains due to the stresses. A finer subdivision of
these integration layers leads to improvements in accuracy of only few percent in
most cases. Default: GAUS = 1, maximum value: GAUS=3
SOLV CTRL SOLV 0 : to switch off the calculation to only store non-linear parameters for
ASE (see record PLAS).
CTRL SOLV - : without input to SOLV, HASE calculates the flexibility matrix and
inverts it to a stiffness matrix (may take some time).
CTRL SOLV NONL : works without inversion of the flexibility matrix. But ASE then
has to iterate, see ASE STEX OPT ITER. May be quicker in total.
FAKU Piles in the halfspace: Works only on PILE (HASE-piles) and not on extended piles
(real beam elements):
If a pile foot stands on a rigid subsoil, it transmits its load directly downward and
not partially as tension upward (as the equation [1] for a load which acts in the
halfspace interior would suggest). Based on the soil profile (the actual available
stiffnesses), HASE automatically determines how much of the pile load is diverted
directlydownward. Thenthispartproducesnotensionupward. Itisoutputas“faku”
in the table of pile parameters. For special cases, a minimum value can be defined
with FAKU - when CTRL FAKU 1 is set, that means all pile forces (also the skin
friction forces) are transmitted downward as compression.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-3HASE|InputDescription
3.4 GRP – Selection of Element Groups
Seealso: CTRL
GRP
Item Description Unit Default
NR Group number −/LT !
ALL All groups are selected
VAL Option LT FULL
OFF do not use
YES use, no output of the results
FULL use, output of the results
FOOT X-Pile foot radius. Negative values are interpreted as m -1.0
a multiplier of pile radius.
RC Contact radius (for the stiffness) m -
CC Contact circumference (for nonlinear mantle friction) m -
All elements are used if nothing is input. When there is input, only the specified groups get
activated.
To simulate the effects of additional stiffness at the pile foot, the (positive) diameter of the pile
foot can be specified with FOOT. Alternatively, the pile foot diameter can be specified as a
multiple of the pile diameter (where the pile diameter is calculated as an equivalent diameter,
from the pile cross-section area), in which case the FOOT value is flagged with a minus sign.
The default pile footing is 1.4 times the pile diameter, or −1.4.
With the input of the options RC and CC the user is able to overwrite the values of the contact
radius and contact circumference which are computed by HASE automatically.
3-4 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3.5 HALF – Halfspace Definition
Seealso: CTRL,LOAR,LC,LOAD,PLAS
HALF
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Type of bedding distribution in the plan view LT CONS
CONS Constant profile everywhere
COOR Interpolation of bore coordinates with
weight factor EP
LAYR Layered halfspace
EP Weight factor (only for TYPE COOR) − 1.5
Z Surface of halfspace in the global system m 0
ZVAR Variable surface level, see chapter 2 LT AUTO
NO QUADs below Z are not taken into account
AUTO horizontalQUADsbelowZalsohaveahalf-
space contact
FAKX Stiffness factor in x direction − 0.4
FAKY Stiffness factor in y direction − 0.4
FAKZ Stiffness factor in z direction − 1
NAME DatabasenameofsecondaryQUADsystemorname LT32 -
of newly generated LAYR database
For TYPE CONS, the halfspace in the plan view has constant layer thicknesses, with each
layer containing uniform material parameters.
For TYPE COOR, a variable profile distribution can be defined based on interpolation of bore
profiles (see Section 2.3). Example: hase5_profile_interpolation.dat
For TYPE LAYR soil properties (stiffness and resistance values from BLAY) are interpolated
from the discrete model of a layered half-space (3D triangular prism mesh) defined automati-
callybyaboreprofiledefinition(seeSection2.3). Thegeometryofthis3Dmeshissavedinan
additional database under a file name specified with item NAME. If no name is given, then the
newly created *CDB will be saved under a name $(nme)_yr.cdb, where $(nme) stands
for the name of the current project. Example: hase4_layr_interpolation.dat
AhorizontalbeddingcanbesimulatedwithFAKXandFAKY.ForFAKXandFAKYseechapter
2: Horizontal Stiffness.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-5HASE|InputDescription
3.6 BORE – Selection of Bore Profiles
Seealso: HALF
BORE
Item Description Unit Default
NO Numbers of selected bore profiles − !
The record BORE specifies which bore profiles defined in AQUA are to be used by HASE for
thedefinitionofthehalfspace. Dependingonthetypeoftheinterpolation,thefollowingapplies:
1. CONS - For this type of interpolation only one bore profile will be used for the definition
of the halfspace. If BORE record is not specified, then a bore profile with smallest bore
profile number (as defined in AQUA) will be selected. Similarly if more than one bore
profile is defined with BORE record, bore profile with smallest bore profile number will be
used.
2. QUAD - BORE record is not used for this interpolation type. All bore profiles which are
defined with AQUA and used for the generation of the secondary QUAD system will also
be used for the definition of the halfspace.
3. COOR - Minimum two bore profiles must be specified with BORE record. If nothing is
specified, all bore profiles defined within AQUA are used for the interpolation.
4. LAYR - Minimum three bore profiles must be specified for this method to be applied. As
before, if nothing is specified, all bore profiles defined within AQUA are used.
3-6 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3.7 PILE – Internal Piles in the Halfspace
Seealso: PLAS
PILE
Item Description Unit Default
X Pile coordinates or node number with m !
Y X=NNO and Y=node number m !
D0 Pile diameter m D
D Pilefootdiameter. Theeffectivestressduetotheset- m !/1.5D0
tlement is determined directly under the pile foot with
this diameter.
Z Pile foot coordinate m !
MANT Fractionoftotalpileloadtransferredtothesoilaspile − 0.50
skin friction
ZMAN Z coordinate starting at which skin friction is active. m *
Default: 25% of the pile length, starting from the sur-
face, is assumed to be inactive.
PMAM Max. load transferable by skin friction kN -
PMAF Max. load transferable through pile foot; PMAM, kN -
PMAFapplyonlytononlinearcalculation-seerecord
PLAS
MNO Material number of piles − -
TITL Pile designation LT16 -
TherearetwowaystomodelmodelloadintroductionbymeansofpilesinHASE–as internal
HASE-piles (PILE) or as extended piles (XPIL).
InternalHASE-pilesarenotdiscretizedinthefiniteelementsystem. Theyareapropertyofthe
halfspace and defined with command PILE. Example - hase8_intern_piles.dat
(to comare: extended piles see example - hase22_abutment_extended_piles.dat)
WithPILEdefinedinternalpilesarenotrealbeamelementsbuthaveanimpactonthestiffness
coefficientscalculatedfornodesonthehalfspacesurface. Inalinearcalculation,itisassumed
that the the total pile load is transferred to the soil, by means of a skin friction component
(given by MANT) and a pile foot component. In a nonlinear calculation, loads are transferred
similarlytothesoil,butwiththerestrictionthatthelimitsspecifiedbyPMAM/PMAFmaynotbe
SOFiSTiK2023 3-7HASE|InputDescription
exceeded.
Theskinfrictionisdistributedoverthelengthofthepilerelativetothesoilstiffnessesstartingat
depthZMAN,andthennumericallyintegrated. WiththeZMANrecord,itispossibletosimulate
that barely any force is transferred by the pile into the ground immediately beneath the bottom
plate due to the small relative displacements at shallow depths. The loading occurs inside
NAMZ
L
TNAM
Figure3.1: HASEPiles
the halfspace according to: [1], p. 195 Halfspace Solution according to Midlin. This divides a
load in the halfspace into a downward compressive stress component and an upward tensile
stress component.
The pile precompression is taken into account with Äl=N.l/EA when calculating settlements.
Theexactnormalforcedistributionisusedherewithafixedconcreteelasticmodulusof28000
MN/m2 (C30/37). The concrete surface A is calculated from the diameter.
If a material number is defined for the piles, the elastic modulus of that material is used for the
analysis(e.g. forvibratedpiles). Ifamaterialnumberisnotgiven,anelasticmodulusof28000
MN/m2 is used for the analysis.
The record PILE is available only in the expanded version of HASE (HASE-3D).
Further notes for non-linear calculations are given in record PLAS.
3-8 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3.8 PLAS – Plasticizing
Seealso: CTRL,HALF,PILE
PLAS
Item Description Unit Default
PMAX Maximum bedding stress in the halfspace kN/m2 -
DPDS increasing max-sigma to the interior of the slab - -
MUE Friction value in the bottom slab for horizontal effects − 0.5
Non-linear halfspace calculations:
The program ASE can be used to analyse the lifting of the bottom plate in a non- linear calcu-
lation, as well as plasticizing at the plate edge and at the pile nodes.
The record PLAS can be used to input a maximum soil pressure PMAX in kN/m2 for the
bottom plate (which is valid over the entire halfspace). The input value represents a positive
compressive stress.
The following parameters can be specified for nonlinear calculations in ASE:
• at halfspace nodes:
compression: on input of PLAS: max. bedding max-sigma = PMAX (record PLAS)
compression: with input of PLAS+DPDS you can simulate a phi and C of a soil. The max.
bedding max-sigma can then increase starting from the boundary.
Directlyattheboundary,max-sigmastartswithPLAS,totheinterioroftheslabmax-sigma
then increases with an e-function.
Example PLAS=40 DPDS=1.8
At the boundary: max-sigma =PLAS =40 kN/m2
0.25 m inside: max-sigma 40 kN/m2*e0.25∗1.8 = 63 kN/m2
1.00 m inside: max-sigma 40 kN/m2*e1.00∗1.8 = 240 kN/m2
In an
tension: no tensile forces between the halfspace and the slab
• at pile nodes:
compression: max. pile force = PMAM+PMAF (record PILE)
tension: max. pile force = PMAM (tensile piles)
If the maximum pile foot force PMAF or the maximum skin friction force PMAM is reached
before the maximum total pile force is reached PMAX=PMAM+PMAF (if MANT is not input as
relation PMAM/PMAX), a plasticising will occur in ASE beginning at this load condition. The
pile deformations then increase disproportionately according to the linear initial condition. If
the pile force reaches the value PMAX, from then on the pile will be pressed into the soil.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-9HASE|InputDescription
Sensitivity Analysis:
If only the non-linear parameters in the record PLAS PMAX or PILE -PMAM-PMAF are modi-
fied, these can be written into the database with CTRL SOLV 0 in a HASE calculation without
a new calculation of the linear halfspace stiffness in the file project.$e2. Then ASE can do a
non-linearcalculationofthemodifieddata. However,amodificationofPILEMANTalsoaffects
at the linear stiffness. Therefore PILE MANT should be determined for the expected service
pile load.
3-10 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3.9 LOAR – Load Radii
Seealso: HALF
LOAR
Item Description Unit Default
NO Node number LT 1
ALL Minimumloadradiusforallnodesisdefined
with R.
Default: 0.01 m
BEAM Minimum load radius for beam nodes is de-
fined with R.
Default: 0.25 m
R Load radius m !
SOFiSTiK2023 3-11HASE|InputDescription
3.10 LC – Load Case
Seealso: HALF,LOAD
LC
Item Description Unit Default
NO Load case number − 1
NAME Database name of the results LT32 *
TITL Load case title LT24 *
STVZ Load case number for saving the displacement u-z of − 1
the half space surface
The default for NAME is the current project name. However, results of a calculation can also
be used with another database. Then the support forces of the external database are used.
The relation of the data is given by the external node numbers.
With TITL, a new name can be assigned to the load case. This can be useful if the results are
taken from an external database (the designation selected there is used as default). The input
of TITL is required for independent settlement calculations.
There are two calculation modes:
1. LC without input of LOAD records: halfspace calculations
The program uses a load case that was calculated with a statics program and evaluates
the stresses with the loads of the halfspace determined by the statics program (= support
reactions of the building).
ThehalfspacemustalreadyhavebeencalculatedinapriorHASEcalculationandisread
in. A specification of the record HALF is not allowed in this case.
The bedding stresses are stored per default in the database and can be represented
graphically. If there are QUAD beddings defined in addition to the halfspace, then it is not
possible to store bedding stresses because of the risk of a collision.
2. LC followed by a LOAD record: halfspace calculations
An independent settlement calculation is executed. The halfspace must be defined with
the record HALF. The loads at the nodes must be input with the record LOAD. The dis-
placements of this calculation are saved with the load case number to be used for a
graphical representation. If a load case of the same number already existed, it is deleted.
If NO=0 is input, then nothing is stored.
About STVZ:
For non-linear analyses in the HASE postprocessing-calculation (calculation mode 1), the dis-
placementu-zofthehalfspacecanbestoredinaseparateloadcasenumberwithLC...STVZ
. In non-linear analyses, this displacement differs from the displacement of the lower edge of
the bottom plate (displacement from the program ASE), because in the non-linear case the
3-12 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
bottom plate can lift up because of tension or can press itself into the soil by plasticizing. The
example Hase9.dat: ’Bottom Plate Non-linear Lift and Plasticizing’ shows an application and
the comparison of the two displacements with the program WING.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-13HASE|InputDescription
3.11 LOAD – Single Loads
Seealso: HALF,LC
LOAD
Item Description Unit Default
NO Node number from which the load performs − !
PZ Load in Z direction kN 0
For an input of loads with LOAD a separate settlement calculation is executed (see record
LC). The loads are interpreted as untensioned loads on the halfspace. The stiffnesses from a
FE system are not considered. If a load case with the same number already exists, it will be
deleted.
One separate settlement analysis that can be used for test purposes is specifying the node
number 0, which causes a constant load to be applied [e.g.: LC 101 ; LOAD NO 0 PZ 1.0] at
all halfspace QUAD elements.
3-14 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3.12 SELE – Results Selection
Seealso: SELP
SELE
Item Description Unit Default
NO Node number. − -
IfNOisnotspecified,Zcoordinatesarecalculatedfor
all points
ZR Depth to be examined (relative to halfspace surface, m 0
to be input always positive, independant if global Z
goes up or down)
(old input Z has the same effect)
Without an input of a depth Z, stresses are output for node NO at all layer boundaries.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-15HASE|InputDescription
3.13 SELP – Selection of the Plot Representation
Seealso: SELE
SELP
Item Description Unit Default
ZR Depth to be stored ( >=0.0; relative to halfspace sur- − -
face )
LCST Load case storage number − !
BRIC File name for the newly generated database LT32 *
DX Grid offset in x direction m !
DY Grid offset in y direction m !
HMIN Minimum grid size m !
Application:
With for example
SELP ZR 5.0 LCST 1001
thestressesarecalculatedinthehalfspaceatadepthof5.0mandstoredasbeddingstresses
of the QUAD elements in the load case number 101. In a later WING-calculation, the values
can then be represented as contour lines, for example (LC 101 ; CONT P ).
With the input:
SELP ZR (2 20 2) LCST (102 2) BRIC "file"
a new file.cdb is generated in addition to the results for LCST. This file contains the BRIC ele-
ments with stresses at the nodes. BRIC elements are obtained by extruding QUAD elements
of the soil-structure interface (3.2a and b).
3-16 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
Figure 3.2: (a) Original system (b) System of the newly generated database containing stresses
andsettlementsatthenodesoftheBRICelements.
IfarecordspecifiesonlyoneLCSTnumberwithoutadepthZ,thentheloadcasenumbersare
automatically incremented. So several LC load cases can be analyzed in one run, producing
n_LC∗n_depth load cases.
The file name for a BRIC output can also be given in a separate input line without a depth Z
input.
If in addition to BRIC filename, items DX, DY and HMIN are defined and larger than zero, then
a new database containing BRIC elements with stresses and settlements at nodes is created.
This BRIC GRID system is generated as follows (3.3):
• bounding box for the soil-structure interface elements is found and extended by values DX
and DY
• regular grid mesh at the surface of the half-space is created, with the consideration of the
minimal mesh size HMIN
• surface grid mesh is then extruded to generate BRIC elements
SOFiSTiK2023 3-17HASE|InputDescription
Figure3.3: BRICGRIDsystem
3-18 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|HASE
3.14 ECHO – Output Control
ECHO
Item Description Unit Default
OPT A literal from the following list: LT -
PROF Soil profile value
PILE Pile elements
NODE Nodal values, load radii
ELEM Elements
STRE Stresses
DISP Displacements
HALF Halfspace characteristic values
NPRO Profile values in the nodes
LOAD Loads
BEDD Saving of foundation stresses
STAT Statistics, computing times
FULL activates all options
VAL Value of output option −/LT FULL
OFF No calculation or output
NO No output
YES Regular output
FULL Extensive output
EXTR Full output
The default is NO for PROF, NODE, ELEM and LOAD, and YES for all others.
The storage of the bedding stresses can be switched off with ECHO BEDD OFF. For test pur-
poses, ECHO BEDD 77 causes the equivalent bedding modulus (beddingstress/deformation)
to be stored as bedding - but then the title in the WINGRAF plot is wrong.
This record must be preceded by its name ECHO to avoid confusion with similarly- named
record arguments.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-19HASE|InputDescription
3-20 SOFiSTiK2023OutputDescription|HASE
4 Output Description
4.1 Check List for Bore Profiles
TheprofilesareoutputonlyifmodificationsoccurredoroutputisrequestedwithECHOPROF.
The table is identical to that of the program AQUA.
Thetableoftheboreprofilesusedinthecalculationisalsoprinted. Theboreprofilesselected
with the record BORE appear here.
Used Bore Profiles
Profile Number of the bore profile
position X [m] Y [m] Position of the bore profile
4.2 Soil Parameters at the Nodes
Using TYPE QUAD or TYPE COOR in the record HALF, the averaged soil parameters at the
nodes are printed. This can be switched off with ECHO NPRO NO.
SOIL PARAMETERS IN NODES
Node Nodes numbers
depth [m] Start-depth z of this layer
bottom End depth of the last layer
K0, K1, K2, K3 [MPa] Stiffness moduli in MPa
4.3 Half-Space Parameters
This table is output per default for each halfspace definition. It can be turned off with ECHO
HALF NO.
H A L F S P A C E
soil profile Soil profile number PROF from record HALF
number of layers from BLAY (program AQUA)
top-halfspace [m] Global Z coordinate
min-load-radius [m] from record LOAR
beam-load-radius [m] Default for beam nodes
influence-radius [m] reduces bandwidth of stiffness matrix
direction of the bedding (Factor) Thevalueindicatesthepercentageofthetotalstiff-
X, Y, Z ness stored in the X, Y or Z direction.
SOFiSTiK2023 4-1HASE|OutputDescription
contact area [m2] Sum of all node areas
total number nodes Contact nodes at the top of halfspace
active quad nodes NumberofQUADnodesfoundatthesurfaceofthe
halfspace
active quad elements Number of QUAD elements found at the surface
of the halfspace (used for determining the load ra-
dius)
active quad area [m2] Sum of all QUAD element areas
beam nodes Number of nodes without QUAD element connec-
tion
Maximum bedding stress for non- Maximum bedding stress defined in the record
linear analysis PLAS in kN/m2
4.4 Pile Values
This list of pile values can be requested with ECHO PILE.
P I L E
Title Designation of the pile
X [m] Pile coordinates in the building footprint
Y [m]
node [-] Node number
D-pile [m] Pile diameter
D-foot [m] Pile foot diameter
Z-foot [m] Pile foot depth coordinate
faku [o/o] Percentage of pile force that acts directly down-
ward and does not produce tension upward (pile
at stiff ground) in %
mant [o/o] Part of skin friction at the load transfer in %
z-mant [m] Zcoordinatestartingatwhichtheskinfrictiontakes
effect
P-mant [kN] Maximum load transferred by skin friction
P-foot [kN/m] Maximum load transferred at pile foot
4.5 Check List for Nodes
Thenodelistisonlyoutputifloadradiiwereinputmanually,orifoutputisrequestedwithECHO
NODE.
4-2 SOFiSTiK2023OutputDescription|HASE
N O D E S
Number Node number
X [m] Coordinate
Y [m] Coordinate
Z [m] Coordinate
Load radius [m] r
Area [m2] r2Pi
Contact numbers of the substruc- Node number
ture
4.6 Check List for Loads
Thislistisoutputonlyforanindependentsettlementcalculation. Forthestresscalculationwith
a load case > 0 it can be requested with ECHO LOAD FULL.
NODAL LOADS
Node Node number
P-Z [kN] Load value
4.7 Results
The displacement printout can be switched off with ECHO DISP NO and the printout of the
stresses with ECHO STRE NO.
STRESSES IN THE HALFSPACE
node Node number
depth-z [m] global Z coordinate
-sig [kN/m2] compressive stresses are positive (1 kpa = 1 kilo-
Pascal = 1 kN/m2)
setting [mm] settlements at the surface
For a non-uniform soil distribution over the plan view of a building design, differences in settle-
mentcanoccurrelativetoresultsproducedbystaticscalculations,sinceinformingthestiffness
matrix, the soil profile at point i affects the settlement at point k. In the post-processing stage,
however, only the profile values of the node k are used for its settlement calculation.
SOFiSTiK2023 4-3HASE|OutputDescription
4-4 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
5 Examples
The input files which are explained here are to be found in the installation directory SOFiSTiK
in the subdirectory hase.dat/english. Alternatively, you can find these examples in the TEDDY
menu HELP > EXAMPLES sorted by program name and language.
// For additional help like tutorials, tutorial movies and practical examples please // refer to the
SOFiSTiK Infoportal (www.sofistik.com/Infoportal).
SOFiSTiK2023 5-1HASE|Examples
5.1 Base Plate Calculated with Stiffness Coefficient Method
Abaseplatewithdimensionsof6m−10misgiven,withwallloadsconsideredasuntensioned
loads. The base plate has a thickness of 30cm. Example - hase1_bottomslab.dat
70
0
7
0
7
70
Figure5.1: Baseplatewithwallloads
The system is calculated as a plate with the program ASE. The input reads:
+PROG AQUA
HEAD BASE PLATE - STIFFNESS COEFFICIENT METHOD
NORM DC DIN NDC 1045-1
CONC 1 TYPE C FCN 25
BORE NO 1
BLAY S 0.0 ES 50000
BLAY S 1.2 ES 12000
BLAY S 3.2 ES 9000
BLAY S 5.2 ES 90000
BLAY S 10.0 ES 200000
BLAY S 999.0 ES 200000
END
+PROG SOFIMSHA
HEAD BASE PLATE - STIFFNESS COEFFICIENT METHOD
...
END
+PROG HASE
HEAD
HALF TYPE CONS
5-2 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
BORE 1
END
+PROG SOFILOAD
HEAD
LC 100
LINE TYPE pzz P1 70 X1 0.1 Y1 0.1 Z1 0.0 P2 70 X2 9.9 Y2 0.1 Z2 0.0
LINE TYPE pzz P1 70 X1 9.9 Y1 0.1 Z1 0.0 P2 70 X2 9.9 Y2 5.9 Z2 0.0
LINE TYPE pzz P1 70 X1 0.1 Y1 5.9 Z1 0.0 P2 70 X2 9.9 Y2 5.9 Z2 0.0
LINE TYPE pzz P1 70 X1 0.1 Y1 0.1 Z1 0.0 P2 70 X2 0.1 Y2 5.9 Z2 0.0
END
+PROG ASE
HEAD
STEX $(PROJECT)
LC 1
LCC 100
END
+PROG HASE
HEAD STRESS ANALYSIS AT HALF SPACE
LC 1
SELE - 0
END
ThefirstHASEruncalculatesandsavesthestiffnessofthehalfspacebasedonthesoilprofile
1 defined earlier in AQUA. The text output of HASE is a table describing the characteristics of
the halfspace:
Used Boreprofiles
Profile position X [m] Y [m]
1 0.000 0.000
Halfspace
Soil- number of top-half- min-load- beam-load influence-
profil layers space[m] radius[m] radius[m] radius[m]
1 5 0.000 0.020 0.250 999.000
direction of the bedding total active active active
(factor) number quad- quad- quad-
X Y Z nodes nodes elements area[m2]
0.00 0.00 1.00 99 99 80 60.000
Halfspace-stiffness calculated
In the following ASE calculation, the halfspace stiffness is read in with STEX. The wall loads
are calculated in load case 1. The dead load of the base plate is not included, since its impact
issimilartounloading. (Aconstantloadproducesasettlementwithpositivebendingmoments
in the plate. Here, however, the point is to find the negative moments from the wall loads.)
SOFiSTiK2023 5-3HASE|Examples
After the calculation with the program ASE, the deformations and bending moments can be
plotted:
Figure5.2: Displacedstructure
Figure5.3: Bendingmoments
In the following HASE calculation, the stresses in the halfspace are determined. Only the
stresses on the surface of the halfspace are returned by SELE - 0. The output for the node
series 600 is:
Stresses in the Halfspace Loadcase 1
node depth-z[m] -sig[kN/m2] setting[mm]
601 0.000 112.32 8.140
602 0.000 14.70 7.512
603 0.000 9.90 6.971
604 0.000 9.43 6.609
605 0.000 9.38 6.483
606 0.000 9.43 6.609
607 0.000 9.90 6.971
608 0.000 14.70 7.512
609 0.000 112.32 8.140
Per default, the bedding stresses were also written to the database, so that they can be repre-
sented with the program WING. The stresses in elements centers of gravity can be requested
5-4 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
with QUAD P :
Figure5.4: Beddingstressesloadcase1-stiffnesscoefficientmethod
ThecutrepresentationwithSECTPreturns,fortheperpendicularcutshownhere,theinforma-
tion about maximum edge stress determined by HASE . The maximal value of 112.32kN/m2
(KN/m2 = kP = Kilo Pascal) occurs at node 601.
Figure5.5: Beddingstressesincuts-stiffnesscoefficientmethod
For comparison, the plate was also calculated using the Winkler assumption with a constant
bedding of 5000KN/m3. Because the resulting settlement is not a smooth curve, a higher soil
pressure occurs in the center of the plate, and thus there are also higher bending moments.
Thedistributionofthebeddingstressesresultsinamaximumedgestressofonly33KN/m2 for
theperpendicularcut. Thesoilpressureinthecenteroftheplateincreasesfromapproximately
10KN/m2 (stiffness coefficient method) to 12KN/m2:
Forotherloads,theeffectcanbetheopposite: forexample,whencalculatingthesupportloads
underacolumnontheplateusingthestiffnesscoefficientmethod,theplatebendingmoments
SOFiSTiK2023 5-5HASE|Examples
Figure5.6: Beddingstressesincuts-stiffnesscoefficientmethod
actually increase due to the column weight. The moments resulting from the settlement then
have the same sign as the positive moments under the column.
5-6 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
5.2 Constant Soil Pofile - Three-dimensional Frame with a Plate
Given a building which is idealized as a framework. The bottom plate lies on the ground,
which is characterized by two soil layers each having a constant stiffness module. The soil
parameters are constant over the plan view. Example - hase2_3d.dat
Figure5.7: Plan-Frameandgirdersystemwiththebottomplate
The framework is composed of beams elements, and the bottom plate is entered as QUAD
elements. Separatefoundationsaregivenatthenodes1402and1406. Floorslabsaredefined
usingQUADelementstocompletetheloaddescriptionandtorepresenttheupperfloorlevels.
(In this way the hidden line algorithm supplies more plastic pictures.)
No fixities are specified in the input. The bottom plate lies at the level z = +2.00m (global Z
coordinate).
The soil profile is defined with the records BORE and BLAY and assigned soil profile number
3 (program AQUA). In the first layer from z = 2.00m to 4.80m, the stiffness modulus is set to
90Mp, and in the second layer only 30Mp. Beneath the global Z coordinate of 9.80m, it is
assumed the ground is perfectly rigid. This ends the description of the soil profile.
+PROG AQUA
HEAD
!...
BORE 3
BLAY 2.00 ES 90000
BLAY 4.80 ES 30000
BLAY 9.80 ES 30000
!...
END
SOFiSTiK2023 5-7HASE|Examples
Figure5.8: Systembottomplate-beamsandcolumns-slabs
The half space is now described in HASE:
+PROG HASE
HEAD FORMATION OF THE HALFSPACE STIFFNESS MATRIX
HALF TYPE CONS PROF 3 Z 2.00 FAKX 1 FAKY 1 FAKZ 1
LOAR BEAM 0.70
END
The stiffness is stored in all three directions with FAKX 1 1 1. This precludes the necessity to
later specify horizontal fixings. The horizontal loads are distributed over the bottom plate and
thereby transferred to the building ground.
The output of HASE is:
Used Boreprofiles
Profile position X [m] Y [m]
3 0.000 0.000
Halfspace
Soil- number of top-half- min-load- beam-load influence-
profil layers space[m] radius[m] radius[m] radius[m]
3 2 2.000 0.020 0.700 999.000
direction of the bedding total active active active
(factor) number quad- quad- quad-
X Y Z nodes nodes elements area[m2]
1.00 1.00 1.00 227 225 192 300.000
Halfspace-stiffness calculated
For the 192 QUAD elements of the bottom plate, HASE distributes the area of each element
5-8 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
among its nodes. HASE labels the two free-standing nodes 1402 and 1406 as beam nodes
(handled as free-standing foundation nodes). For these nodes, the input LOAR BEAM 0.70
means that the load radius is 70cm (see output example 2). The total area (QUAD elements
+separatefoundationsatthebeamsnodes)is 303m2. TheQUADelementsofthefloorslabs
are not used in HASE, since their Z coordinate is not at the level +2.00m.
Now the overall system (frame + plate + halfspace) is calculated for the load case dead load
with the program ASE:
+PROG SOFILOAD ! Loads
HEAD
LC 1 FACD 1
QUAD FROM GRP TO 0 TYPE PZZ P 20
END
PROG ASE
HEAD
ECHO DISP,FORC,NOST NO
CTRL PLAB 0
STEX
LC 1
END
TheQUADelements2001-7999arethefloorslabsintheupperfloors. Theyreceiveaconstant
uniformly-distributed load.
ThesupportreactionscalculatedbytheprogramASErepresentthecontactforcesbetweenthe
bottom plate and the halfspace. Apart from the vertical reactions, a horizontal bedding is also
apparent. (The bottom plate and the soil can sustain horizontal forces from the framework.)
Nodal Reactions and Residual Forces
Loadcase 1
Node P-X P-Y P-Z M-X M-Y M-Z
No [kN] [kN] [kN] [kNm] [kNm] [kNm]
101 -86.9
102 -144.1
103 -106.5
. . .
901 -127.1
902 -202.1
903 -148.6
. . .
The representation of the deformed structure (in Program WING with VISI HIDD LINE) shows
the local deformations under the columns as well as the global settlement (deformation of the
highest floor slab).
Settlement in the separate foundations depends strongly on the load surface of the separate
foundations,sincethestressinthesoilundertheseparatefoundationsresultsmainlyfromtheir
SOFiSTiK2023 5-9HASE|Examples
own support load. Because of the relatively large separation between the separate foundation
andthebottomplate,theimpactofloadsonthebottomplateonthesettlementoftheseparate
foundations is minimal.
Figure5.9: Deformedstructure
In a HASE-postprocessing run, the stress in the building ground can now be analysed:
+PROG HASE
HEAD STRESS ANALYSIS AT HALFSPACE
LC 1
SELE 101,102,202
SELE 1402 3,4,5,6,7,8,9
END
The stresses resulting from load case 1 are requested. For the nodes 101, 102 and 202,
stresses at layer boundaries are requested. Under the node 1402, stresses are requested at
other specific depths.
Stresses in the Halfspace Loadcase 1
node depth-z[m] -sig[kN/m2] setting[mm]
101 2.000 185.42 5.638
4.800 31.60
9.800 17.26
102 2.000 153.72 6.718
4.800 40.54
9.800 20.23
202 2.000 112.64 7.324
4.800 46.54
9.800 22.35
1402 3.000 163.78 7.346
5-10 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
4.000 58.92
5.000 30.59
6.000 20.99
7.000 17.36
8.000 15.91
9.000 15.30
The settlements on the surface of the halfspace which are determined here in HASE are in
agreement with the nodal displacements u-z from the program ASE.
However,thisisnotthecaseforsoilparameterswhichvaryovertheplanview(thisisexplained
in Chapter 4).
SOFiSTiK2023 5-11HASE|Examples
5.3 Interpolation with Weight Factor
A variable soil profile distribution in the plan view can also be specified using coordinate inter-
polation. For the foundation of a gas tank, the following bore locations were tested: Example -
hase5_profil_interpolation.dat
Figure5.10: Borelocationsintheplan
ThesoilprofilewiththecoordinatesoftheborelocationareinputintheprogramAQUAandthe
system in program SOFIMSHA . The controls to the halfspace are defined with the program
HASE.
+PROG AQUA
HEAD INTERPOLATION WITH INFLUENCE-FACTOR - GAS TANK
NORM DC DIN NDC 1045-1
CONC NO 1
CONC NO 2
BORE 4 0 0
BLAY 0.00 ES 14000
BLAY 2.80 ES 12000
BLAY 8.80 ES 12000
BORE 7 9 0
BLAY 0.00 ES 16000
BLAY 2.80 ES 9000
5-12 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
BLAY 8.80 ES 9000
BORE 11 9 8
BLAY 0.00 ES 13000
BLAY 2.80 ES 10000
BLAY 10.5 ES 10000
BORE 12 -1 6
BLAY 0.00 ES 9000
BLAY 4.00 ES 6000
BLAY 10.5 ES 6000
BORE 13 -5 7
BLAY 0.00 ES 13000
BLAY 4.50 ES 9000
BLAY 10.5 ES 9000
BORE 15 -9 -1
BLAY 0.00 ES 15000
BLAY 2.80 ES 16000
BLAY 9.80 ES 16000
BORE 22 1 -9
BLAY 0.00 ES 14000
BLAY 2.80 ES 15000
BLAY 9.80 ES 15000
END
+PROG SOFIMSHA
HEAD INTERPOLATION WITH INFLUENCE-FACTOR - GAS TANK
...
END
+PROG HASE
HEAD
CTRL INFL 4.0
HALF TYPE COOR EP 2 Z 0 FAKX 0.5 FAKY 0.5 FAKZ 1
END
The interpolation is assigned a weight factor of EP=2, i.e. the node stiffness coefficient falls
at a rate proportional to the square of the distance from the nodes and the bore profile. For
example, a bore profile contributes nine times more to the stiffness coefficient of a node than
another profile which is situated three times as far away. Layer depths are interpolated in the
same way.
Theinfluenceradiuswasdefinedas4m. Thusthebandwidthofthehalfspacestiffnessmatrix
is limited to a nodal distance of 4 m. A nodal load ceases to influence the settlement of other
nodes that are located further than 4 m away.
Thehorizontalsupportofthetankisimplementedsimplybydefiningthehorizontalstiffnessof
all nodes as 50 per cent of the vertical stiffness.
This is the output of HASE:
SOFiSTiK2023 5-13HASE|Examples
Used Boreprofiles
Profile position X [m] Y [m]
4 0.000 0.000
7 9.000 0.000
11 9.000 8.000
12 -1.000 6.000
13 -5.000 7.000
15 -9.000 -1.000
22 1.000 -9.000
Soilprofile - Interpolation
with profilecoordinates X0 and Y0, influence-factor EP= 2
Soil - Parameters in Nodes
Node depth[m] bottom K0 K1 K2 K3[MPa]
1101 0.000 13.90 0.00 0.00 0.00
2.972 9.333 11.57 0.00 0.00 0.00
1102 0.000 13.87 0.00 0.00 0.00
2.973 9.261 11.34 0.00 0.00 0.00
1103 0.000 13.82 0.00 0.00 0.00
2.976 9.219 11.21 0.00 0.00 0.00
1104 0.000 13.73 0.00 0.00 0.00
2.995 9.226 11.07 0.00 0.00 0.00
1105 0.000 13.56 0.00 0.00 0.00
3.044 9.300 10.81 0.00 0.00 0.00
1106 0.000 13.28 0.00 0.00 0.00
3.127 9.439 10.42 0.00 0.00 0.00
1107 0.000 12.88 0.00 0.00 0.00
3.234 9.615 9.92 0.00 0.00 0.00
1201 0.000 13.83 0.00 0.00 0.00
2.962 9.293 11.76 0.00 0.00 0.00
. . .
Halfspace
Soil- number of top-half- min-load- beam-load influence-
profil layers space[m] radius[m] radius[m] radius[m]
vari 2 0.000 0.020 0.250 4.000
direction of the bedding total active active active
(factor) number quad- quad- quad-
X Y Z nodes nodes elements area[m2]
0.50 0.50 1.00 169 169 156 410.746
Halfspace-stiffness calculated
The bottom plate has a radius of 11.50m. The difference of r2π (= 415.5m2) and the output
contact area of 410.7m2 is due to the polygonal description of the bottom plate with QUAD
elements.
The calculation with the program ASE returns the deformations and the stresses for the case
of a dead load plus the load of the tank contents on the bottom plate.
+PROG SOFILOAD
HEAD
5-14 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
LC 1 FACD 1
QUAD FROM 1001 TO 5999 INC 1 TYPE PZP P 50
END
+PROG ASE
HEAD
ECHO DISP,REAC,FORC,NOST NO
STEX
LC 1
END
Figure5.11: Deformedstructure(condenseddiagramfactor500)
The inclination of the tank due to the different soil parameters in the plan can be clearly seen
(horizontal initial position). The normal stresses show the different loading effects in the radial
direction due to the settlement differences.
Figure5.13: Principalnormalstressn-I
SOFiSTiK2023 5-15HASE|Examples
Figure5.12: Displacementsu-zofthebottomplate
5.4 Stresses in the Halfspace
In the following example, the settlement and the stresses are to be output under the bottom
plateandalsointhesurroundingvacantarea. Inthedeformedstructure,theimpressionofthe
bottom plate in the halfspace can be seen: Example - hase8_intern_piles.dat
In order to produce this result, the area surrounding the bottom plate must also be discretized
with finite elements. In this case, the following points are important:
• A gap must be present between the bottom plate and the surrounding display elements.
Only then can the two nodes (bottom plate nodes and unloaded outer nodes) be treated
and represented differently. In this example, there is a gap of 10 cm.
• On either side of the gap, there should be thin elements to create a good graphical rep-
resentation of the strong curvature of the halfspace surface (other than display, has no
influence on the quality of the results).
• Beyond the layer of thin elements, very large elements should be arranged in order not to
increase the CPU time.
• The surrounding representation elements are defined in the system input with GRP...STI 0
- i.e. they do not possess any stiffness and only their geometry is used.
In a second HASE calculation, the user can request the stresses in the halfspace to be stored
at specified larger depths. The stresses in the depth Z = 1 m are stored in the load case
number 101 , the stresses in 2 m depth in the load case 102 etc.
+PROG HASE
HEAD
ECHO STRE NO
5-16 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
Figure5.14: Bottomplateandsurroundinghalfspacesurface
LC NO 1
SELP Z (1 20 1) LCST (101 1) BRIC HASE8B ! STRESSES IN DEPTH Z=1-20m
END
The following cut diagram is produced with the program WING. The bottom plate is shown by
the polygon. The stresses radiate beyond the bottom plate and into the surrounding area:
Figure5.15: StressesinthedepthZ=5m
In this example, four single piles were placed on the bottom plate under four highly loaded
columns. In the following contour plot, the stress concentrations under the pile foot at a depth
of 10 m can be seen clearly.
SOFiSTiK2023 5-17HASE|Examples
Figure5.16: Stressesatdepth10m
5.5 Pile-Slab Foundation with Extended Piles
Pilesareembeddedinthehalfspaceandpilenodesinteractviathehalfspace. Thismeansthat
if one pile introduces loading forces into the halfspace, this simultaneously has an impact on
all other halfspace nodes, either by inducing settlements or horizontal deformations. Example
- hase21_kpp_extended_piles.dat
Loadcase1showsalinearcalculationwheretheloadiscarriedbytheslabbeddingaswellas
by the piles.
Thepilesareembeddedinthehalfspaceand,inthelinearrun,muchoftheloadistransferred
to the soil from the upper part of the pile, through skin friction.
In the nonlinear run, the skin friction is limited by the values input in the bore profile definition,
specifically the nonlinear contact parameters c0, PMA1, and PMA2. This reduces the skin
friction in the upper part of the pile, causing the pile to sink into the halfspace slightly. The pile
foot and bottom slab therefore carry more of the load.
5-18 SOFiSTiK2023Examples|HASE
Figure5.17: SupportForcesofLoadcase1
Figure5.18: AxialPileBeddingandNormalForces
SOFiSTiK2023 5-19HASE|Examples
5-20 SOFiSTiK2023Bibliography |HASE
Bibliography
[1] J. Bellmann and B. Radmanovic´. Nonlinear Half-Space Contact. Italy: Proceedings of
Structural Engineering World Congress, 2011.
[2] U. Smoltczyk. Grundbau Taschenbuch. Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn, 1980.
[3] J.V. Boussinesq. Applications des potentials a l’étude de l’équilibre et de movement des
solides elastiques. Paris: Gouthier-Villars, 1885.
SOFiSTiK2023 5-21