SIR
Sectional Results
SOFiSTiK | 2023SIR
SectionalResults
SIRManual,ServicePack2023-3Build88
Copyright©2023 bySOFiSTiKAG,Nuremberg,Germany.
SOFiSTiKAG
HQNuremberg OfficeGarching
Flataustraße14 Parkring2
90411Nürnberg 85748GarchingbeiMünchen
Germany Germany
T+49(0)91139901-0 T+49(0)89315878-0
F+49(0)911397904 F+49(0)89315878-23
info@sofistik.com
www.sofistik.com
Thismanualisprotectedbycopyrightlaws. Nopartofitmaybetranslated,copiedorreproduced,inanyformorby
anymeans,withoutwrittenpermissionfromSOFiSTiKAG.SOFiSTiKreservestherighttomodifyortorelease
neweditionsofthismanual.
Themanualandtheprogramhavebeenthoroughlycheckedforerrors. However,SOFiSTiKdoesnotclaimthat
eitheroneiscompletelyerrorfree. Errorsandomissionsarecorrectedassoonastheyaredetected.
Theuseroftheprogramissolelyresponsiblefortheapplications. Westronglyencouragetheusertotestthe
correctnessofallcalculationsatleastbyrandomsampling.
FrontCover
Volkstheater,Munich Photo:FlorianSchreiberContents|SIR
Contents
Contents i
1 Task Description 1-1
2 Theoretical Principles 2-1
3 Input Description 3-1
3.1 Input Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
3.2 Input Records. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-2
3.3 CTRL – Control Parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-3
3.4 SIZE – Size and Scale of the Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-6
3.5 SCHH – Text Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-8
3.6 COLO – Selection of Colours and Line Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-9
3.7 GRP – Group Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-10
3.8 LC – Load Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-11
3.9 SECT – Geometry of the Section Plane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-12
3.10 ECHO – Output Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-16
4 Output Description 4-1
4.1 List of the Forces and Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
4.2 List of the Section Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
4.3 List of the Considered Load Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
4.4 AQUA and AQB Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
4.5 Graphical Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
SOFiSTiK2023 iSIR|Contents
ii SOFiSTiK2023TaskDescription|SIR
1 Task Description
TheprogramSIRallowsthedefinitionofthree-dimensionalsectionsthroughanarbitrarystruc-
ture. Then the following tasks are performed in this section:
• Representationoftheintersectedelements(TRUS,BEAM,CABL,QUAD,BRIC,SPRI)and
the graphical representation of their results
• Calculation of the resultant forces and moments including the support reactions
• OutputofadatarecordforthedimensioningofthesectionwiththeprogramAQBconsisting
of:
– thin-walled cross section parts (from QUAD elements)
– thick-walled cross section parts (fom QUAD and BRIC elements)
– tendons
– internal forces and moments
Thus SIR may be used for the check of FE calculations concerning the global equilibrium and
for the visualisation of the results.
On the other side SIR is an important link for the design of FE structures in the ultimate limit
state. The standard FE design codes treat every element individually and do not fulfill the
global compatibility of those strain states. This may lead to uneconomical or unsure results
dependently on the problem.
A consistent analysis with the limit load theory requests a considerable CPU time. If the user
does not want to consider this, SIR allows to apply a classic beam design also for plane struc-
tures by excising of reasonable subsystems. In this case a global ultimate limit state can be
verified.
SIR generates cross sections and internal forces and moments which can be used directly by
the programs AQUA and AQB or AQBS.
SOFiSTiK2023 1-1SIR|TaskDescription
1-2 SOFiSTiK2023TheoreticalPrinciples|SIR
2 Theoretical Principles
Firstthesectionplaneisdefined. Thiscontainsalocalcoordinatesystemwhichcorrespondsto
abeamcoordiantesystem. A"‘beam"’numberandanabscissaXareusedforthedesignation
of the plane.
First SIR determines the elements which are intersected by the defined section plane. In this
casethelimitsatwhichitispossibletointersectareconsideredinthelocalcoordinatesystem
of the section.
Then the stress state at the intersection area element - section plane is determined for the
intersectedelements. Inthiscasealinearstressdistributionintheelementbasedattheresults
in the Gauss points is placed as a basis. The internal forces and moments of the element at
the intersection area are calculated from the stress state via an integration.
Forces of axial symmetric systems are calculated per m circumference (=QUAD thickness).
SIR integrates at a circle sector. The QUAD thickness increases in radial direction. The thick-
ness at cuts reference point is 1 m.
The internal forces and moments at the intersection point beam - plane are determined with a
cubic interpolation for the intersected beam and truss elements.
SIR calculates the resultant forces and moments around the reference point after the transfor-
mation of the internal forces into the local coordinate system.
SIR is saving all forces in the database directly. Maybe the reference point is not equal to
the centre of gravity of the new generated cross section. In this case additional moments are
calculated due to normal force * lever arm (= distance between reference point and centre of
gravity of the cross section). The reference point position should be checked therefore before
further processing, e.g. a design calculation with program AQB. Perhaps the calculation has
to be repeated with an adapted reference point. With the program WinGRAF it is possible
to perform this iterative step interactively. Otherwise the generated input file (.SR) should be
running, so that AQB may transforme all forces into the centre of gravity of cross section.
Tendon forces lead to a stress level in the whole area element. But the tendon forces are
missedduringtheintegrationofforcesandmomentsifthecutdonothitthetendon. Thiscould
lead to unexpected results (jumps). SIR displays a warning in this case.
AsanfurtheroptionSIRaddsallsupportreactionsinaboxwhichisdefinedviaasectionplane
and an area in front of that and behind that. All nodes and elastic bedded elements within this
area, depending on the control with ECHO REAC, are used for this purpose.
SOFiSTiK2023 2-1SIR|TheoreticalPrinciples
2-2 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
3 Input Description
3.1 Input Language
The input occurs in a free format with the CADINP input language (see the general manual
SOFiSTiK: ’Basics’).
Three categories of units are distinguished:
mm Fixed unit. Input is always required in the specified unit.
[mm] Explicit unit. Input defaults to the specified unit. Alternatively, an explicit as-
signment of a related unit is possible (eg. 2.5[m] ).
[mm] Implicit unit. Implicit units are categorised semantically and denoted by a cor-
1011
responding identity number (shown in green). Valid categories referring to the
unit ”length” are, for example, geodetic elevation, section length and thickness.
Thedefaultunitforeachcategoryisdefinedbythecurrentlyactive(designcode
specific) unit set. This input default can be overridden as described above. The
specified unit in square brackets corresponds to the default for unit set 5 (Eu-
rocodes, NORM UNIT 5).
SOFiSTiK2023 3-1SIR|InputDescription
3.2 Input Records
The following records and items are defined:
Record Items
CTRL OPT VAL KIND TEXT
SIZE TYPE SC W H MARG FORM SPLI
X Y Z OPT
SCHH H1 H2 H3 H4 H5 H6 HE
HL HF ND
COLO C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6
GRP NO OPT LAY ETYP
LC NO CSMI CSMA
SECT NO XS XM YM ZM NX NY
NZ NR XMIN XMAX YMIN YMAX ZMIN
ZMAX REF SNO MNO SX SY SZ
SPEC TYPM TYPT YSC ZSC
ECHO OPT VAL
The input consists of blocks ending with the record END. Within a block the controls CTRL or
groups GRP are adjustable at will. It is also possible to define so many sections SECT as the
user wants. But these sections have to be input in a pure monotonic way with respect to the
identifying beam numbers and X values.
The records HEAD, END and PAGE are described in the general manual SOFiSTiK: ’FEA /
STRUCTURAL Installation and Basics’.
It follows the description of the individual records.
3-2 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
3.3 CTRL – Control Parameter
Seealso: GRP
CTRL
Item Description Unit Default
OPT A literal from the following list: LT FULL
AQUA Input file for program AQUA − *
0 does not create the file
1 thin-walled sections
2 thick-walled sections with minimum
polygon points
3 thick-walled sections condensed ele-
ment edges
4 thick-walled sections elements=single
polygons
6 as 2, create SREC cross sections if
possible
14 as6,ignoredifferentmaterialnumbers
in section parts
SCUT control of shear cuts in program AQUA − -1
<0 without control, use the AQUA default
0 without shear cuts
>0 see AQUA manual
SPT Additional stress points in the AQUA output − *
0 does not create
1 create
SMIN Default of the first cross section numbers − 0
<0 Not used SIR cross sections are
deleted additionally from database (if
CTRL AQUA > 0)
>0 without deleting
0 find a minimum cross section number
-10000 like 0, with deleting
AQBS Input file for AQBS
0 does not create the file
1 file with internal forces
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-3SIR|InputDescription
Item Description Unit Default
2 file with cuts and internal forces
V2MT does add the parts from the plate shear − 1
force to the torsional moments
0 does not add, but the m-xy part of
QUAD elements is added twice
1 add, the m-xy part of QUAD elements
is added once
TOLG Geometric tolerance for cutting m/− -1.0
<0 factor of the default
>0 in m
TOLP Geometric tolerance for generating the m/− -1.0
polygon
<0 factor of the default
>0 in m
LCR design case number of QUAD reinforce- − -1
ments
-1 don’t use reinforcements
BRIC control of integration of volume elements − 0
0 extrapolation of node values from
Gauss points
1 use value of element middle for whole
element
TEND control of integration of QUAD tendons − 1
0 no integration of tendons
1 perform integration of tendons
VAL Value of the option − FULL
KIND Kind of OPT SPT LT -
Z- Point at min.Z, middle
Z+ Point at max.Z, middle
Y+ Point at max.Y, middle
Y- Point at min.Y, middle
Construction stage of cross section of OPT AQUA − -1
with ’-1’ the construction stage is read from the given
load cases
TEXT Input to CTRL AQUA and CTRL AQB − -
The results of SIR can be stored in an input file for the programs AQUA and AQB for the use
3-4 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
of a classical beam design. The kind and the extent of these dates are described with the
corresponding CTRL options.
If nothing is input for CTRL AQUA, CTRL AQUA 2 is used as default if BRIC elements were
found in database. The same default is set if the first cut beam cross section is thick-walled.
Otherwise CTRL AQUA 1 is used as default for sections with beams, trusses or cables. The
defaultofsectionswhichintersectonlyQUADelementsisCTRLAQUA2. Inthecaseofcurved
structures the QUAD elements can be intersected each other. Because such intersection is
unrepresentable for solid elements in AQUA, it is recommended to use CTRL AQUA 1.
The stress points ’Z-’ and ’Z+’ are generated as default of CTRL SPT for thickwalled cross
sections.
For SIR, it is relatively difficult to find a suitable default of CTRL TOLG / TOLP for any system.
Unfortunately, the oriention to the system dimensions is not possible, because even in a large
systemtherecanbeareaswithverysmallelementsthataretobecut. Thisleadstoveryshort
polygonal edges. A too large CTRL TOLP (= maximum length of polygon edges in the gener-
ated cross-section) causes these edges to disappear completely, which can lead to unusable
cross-sections. Therefore it is sometimes more useful to set the geometrical tolerance of the
cuts with CTRL TOLG more wide / finer. Then the decision for one of the two found QUAD
elements is more clearly when cutting nearby QUAD edges.
Instead of an input with SECT in the program AQUA for every section the cross section num-
berscanbedefinedalsoinapuremonotonicwaywithrespecttothisnumberviaCTRLSMIN.
SIR calculates the sum of a QUAD reinforcement determined by BEMESS with CTRL LCR >
0 and ECHO REIN YES/FULL.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-5SIR|InputDescription
3.4 SIZE – Size and Scale of the Representation
Seealso: SCHH,COLO
SIZE
Item Description Unit Default
TYPE Paper size − -4
Positive value landscape format
Negative value portrait format
SC Scale − *
0 format filling
* engineering scale, best possible for filling
the page
W Paper width cm TYPE
H Paper height cm TYPE
MARG Draws a border LT FULL
NO draws an inner border + scale here W and
H define the size of the area to be drawn at
(for single sheet plotters and laserprinters)
YES draws a free border around the drawing W
and H define the size of the paper (2cm
margin, otherwise .5cm)
FULL an additional border to cut the drawing at
the outer paper limits is drawn (for drum
plotters)
FORM Form of the border LT *
STAN standard frame
ZTVK ZTVK-88 frame
URS Report Browser definition
SPLI Partitioning of the paper LT 1x1
HxW height x width
X Angle of the X axis against the horizontal degree 330
Y Angle of the Y axis against the horizontal degree 180
Z Angle of the Z axis against the horizontal degree 270
OPT Option of the graphical representation − 1
1 sorted according to load cases
2 sorted according to components
3,4 as 1,2 but more compact
3-6 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
• The user selects the paper format either implicitly using TYPE or explicitly by the width W
and the height H.The program can set the scale itselfby picking the largest possible scale
with the common values of 1:1, 1:2 and 1:5 or their multiples. An explicit setting of the
scale SC will be used, if technically feasible. Setting SC to 0 results in the largest possible
drawing regardless of the scale.
• The user specifies the scale and by setting W and/or H to zero the appropriate paper size
is automatically chosen. If only one of the two values is set to zero, then the drawing size
will be automatically calculated to fit in the second direction, the scale does not need to be
defined in this case.
WhenusingTYPEyoucanalsospecifytheAmericanformatsorthespecialformatforHewlett-
Packard Plotters instead of the DIN sizes. A preceeding minus sign selects the portrait orien-
tation:
URS,-URS The maximum picture size usable within Report Browser
A,-A ANSI Paper A (11 x 8.5 inch)
B,-B ANSI Paper B (17 x 11 inch)
C,-C ANSI Paper C (22 x 17 inch)
D,-D ANSI Paper D (34 x 22 inch)
HPA,-HPA Hewlett Packard Paper A (259 x 199 mm)
HPB,-HPB Hewlett Packard Paper B (416 x 259 mm)
HPC,-HPC Hewlett Packard Paper C (529 x 378 mm)
HPD,-HPD Hewlett Packard Paper D (809 x 528 mm)
HP4,-HP4 Hewlett Packard Paper 4 (276 x 193 mm)
HP3,-HP3 Hewlett Packard Paper 3 (404 x 276 mm)
HP2,-HP2 Hewlett Packard Paper 2 (564 x 366 mm)
HP1,-HP1 Hewlett Packard Paper 1 (787 x 564 mm)
MP,-MP Matrix-printers with 8 x 12 inch (200 x 287 mm)
LP,-LP Laserprinters with A4 paper (198.4 x 280 mm)
MPW Wider Matrix-printers 14 x 12 inch paper For these formats the default is
MARG NO.
If some representations are desired at the sheet, this may be defined with SIZE SPLI. In this
case a new sheet is used for every section, for OPT 1 and 2 also for every change of an
important criteria (load case or component).
SOFiSTiK2023 3-7SIR|InputDescription
3.5 SCHH – Text Size
Seealso: SIZE,COLO
SCHH
Item Description Unit Default
H1 Legend cm *
Default according to the paper size
H2 Element numbers cm H1
H3 Stresses cm H2·0.7
H4 not used cm
H5 Scales cm H3
H6 not used cm
HE Maximum size for single forces cm 4.0
HL Maximum size for line forces cm 3.0
HF Maximum size for area forces cm 2.0
ND Number of decimal places after comma − -
- default from from
SOFISTIK units
The text sizes are re-initialized for every input of the record SIZE. If a text size is defined with
zero, no designation occurs.
The values HE to HF are preset in a little bit smaller way for multiple representations (SIZE
SPLI).
3-8 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
3.6 COLO – Selection of Colours and Line Types
Seealso: SIZE,SCHH
COLO
Item Description Unit Default
C1 Line type of the legend − 1001
C2 Line type of the intersection lines − 1001
C3 Line type of the positive stresses − 4001
C4 Line type of the negative stresses − 2001
C5 reserved for further line type −
C6 reserved for further line type −
A four-digit number nnnn can be defined for the line type. The meaning is described in detail
in the general manual SOFiSTiK: ’FEA / STRUCTURAL Installation and Basics’. The last digit
means e.g.:
1 = solid 6 = tight dots
2 = dashed 7 = tight dots and dashes
3 = dotted 8 = spaced dashes
4 = dots and dashes 9 = spaced dots
5 = tight dashes 10 = spaced dots and dashes
The first digit describes the pen number. For example the line type 3003 draws a dotted line
with the third pen (green). Default of the colours:
1 = black or white 5 = yellow
2 = red 6 = magenta
3 = green 7 = cyan
4 = blue 8 = brown
SOFiSTiK2023 3-9SIR|InputDescription
3.7 GRP – Group Selection
Seealso: CTRL,SECT
GRP
Item Description Unit Default
NO Group number − *
OPT Option LT FULL
OFF do not use
YES use
FULL use and print the members
LAY Layer of the reinforcement − -
ETYP Element type LT -
- All element types
BEAM Beam elements
TRUS Truss elements
CABL Cable elements
QUAD QUAD elements and their tendons
BRIC Volume elements
SPRI Coupling spring elements
Only the elements with the selected group numbers are considered for the integration of the
internalstressesandmoments. Thedefaultistheuseofallgroupnumbers. ThedefaultNOis
set for all groups with the input of the first record GRP.
If LAY is defined, the TRUSS and QUAD reinforcements are used as reinforcement with this
layer for the cross section descriptions.
The group number of an element is equal to the element number divided by the group divisor
(see program SOFiMSHA).
3-10 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
3.8 LC – Load Cases
Seealso: SECT
LC
Item Description Unit Default
NO Load case number − !
CSMI Addition of the statically determinate parts of the pre- − -
stress for the tendons with the construction stages
CSMI and CSMA
CSMA − CSMI
The integration of the stresses and moments is performed in every following defined section
for every selected load case.
The statically determinate parts of the prestress are determined from the selected tendons
with CSMI and CSMA. These parts are added to the resultant internal forces and moments.
Without this option the prestress is the inherent stress state. It means that only the statically
indeterminate parts of the prestress remain in the resultant internal forces and moments.
Creep+shrinkage for QUAD tendons:
InprogramASEitispossibletocalculatedifferenceloadcasesfromthesumloadcases(CTRL
DIFF ...).
Thelostsduetocreepandshrinkage(withoutprestressingsteel)ofthesedifferenceloadcases
are necessary for the design with program AQB. They should be calculated therefore with the
program SIR in order to prevent a new creep calculation in AQB.
In the program ASE the results of these difference load cases are saved in a special way in
order to consider only the concrete part. Thus SIR ignores the part of the prestressing steel.
The SIR results of the difference load cases are therefore not equal to the simple difference of
the initial (sum) load cases (because the part of the prestressing steel is not available).
You can find an example for that with more hints in program TEDDY at
csm4_quad_singlespan.dat
Example:
In program ASE the construction stage creep and shrinkage 15 (CS 15) is stored in load case
4015 (LC 4015) (=sum load case for creep and shrinkage).
Then in ASE the difference load case 5015 (=difference load case creep and shrinkage) is
created by using the control LC DIFF 1000 (an automatic procedure in program CSM).
Now in SIR only the difference load cases (LC 5015) should be used for calculation. Note that
the construction stages input (LC CSMI) has to be used for load cases with prestress.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-11SIR|InputDescription
3.9 SECT – Geometry of the Section Plane
Seealso: GRP,LC
SECT
Item Description Unit Default
NO Section number − 1
XS Beam ordinate m 0.
XM Global coordinates of the reference point m 0.
YM m 0.
ZM m 0.
NX Components of the section normal − 0.
NY − 0.
NZ − 0.
NR Reference axis for the orientation of the local coordi- LT *
nate system
XX, YY, ZZ, NEGX, NEGY, NEGZ
XMIN Depth of the section box m -0.001
XMAX (for support reactions) m +0.001
YMIN Local coordinates of the active window of m -99.
YMAX the section plane with reference m +99.
ZMIN to the reference point m -99.
ZMAX m +99.
REF Reference type or node LT/− -
SNO Cross section number of the section − *
MNO Material number of this section + 1000·material num- − *
ber reinforcement
SX Components of the local y axis − 0.
SY − 0.
SZ − 0.
SPEC Special options of section Lt4 -
A related to start of beam
E related to end of beam
Tablecontinuedonnextpage.
3-12 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
Item Description Unit Default
B enforce bending member
C enforce compression member
TYPM Type of section for main bending LT SECT
TYPT Type of section for transvers bending LT SECT
SECT Regular section
FACE Face of a clamped support
HFAC Face of a support with articul. connection
(masonry)
IFAC Section at the face of an indirect support
SHEA Critical sect. for shear design
YSC Coordinates of the shear centre m -
ZSC m -
NREF Reference element to REF − -
In each case a section is defined with SECT. An evaluation of the geometry and the internal
forces occurs for all sections within an input block for all the defined load cases and groups.
ThefirstinputforSECTisdeletingallstoredsectionsinthedatabaseandinadditionallresults
of the sections.
ThesectionshavetobedefinedinapuremonotonicwaywithrespecttoNOandtheXSvalue.
Sections are belong together as one "beam" if they have the same number. So they can be
displayed graphically with program WinGraf. SIR will maintain as default the last defined NO,
the very first NO default to 1. The distance XS will be calculated from the difference to the last
reference point (XM,YM,ZM) if a value for XS isnot given.
EverysectionisidentifiedlikeabeamsectionwithanumberandanordinateXS.Thegeometry
of a section plane is described via:
1. the reference point of the plane (corresponds to the origin of the cross section)
2. a local coordinate system of the section normal vector of area = local x axis direction for
the orientation of the y axis
3. a clipping window within the local coordinate system YMIN, YMAX, ZMIN, ZMAX
4. an active range for the supports (XMIN, XMAX)
The user defines the orientation of the local y axis with the item NR or the definition of the
vector with the items SX, SY and SZ .
There are three possibilities:
• no input for NR, SX, SY and SZ: The local z axis is aligned in the direction of gravity. If the
normal of cut is parallel to the direction of gravity (column) the local y axis of the section
SOFiSTiK2023 3-13SIR|InputDescription
Figure3.1: Sectionplane
plane coordinate system is oriented parallelly to the global XY plane.
• Literal XX, YY, ZZ, NEGX, NEGY, NEGZ as input to NR:
The local y axis lies in a plane which is defined through the area normal and the global
coordinate axis according to the above literal.
• Input to SX, SY and SZ:
The local y axis lies in a plane which is defined through the area normal and the vector.
WiththespecificationofanreferencenodeatREFthereferencepointmaybedefinedrelatively
to a structural node. With an input REF QUAD the reference point is defined relatively to the
centre of the QUAD element NREF. Then the default for the local coordinate system is taken
from the element itself.
Ifnoreferencematerialisinputforthedefinitionofthecrosssectionintheinputfortheprogram
AQUA, that one of the first intersected element is used.
If a section lies exactly along a QUAD element edge, the section will find then two QUAD
elements. Only the element which lies behind the plane in the normal direction of the section
plane is used then.
ThewarpingmomentMbfromQUADelementsiscalculatedonlyifthecoordinatesoftheshear
centre are input at YSC and ZSC.
if no record SECT is defined, the sections saved in the database are used, which can be
defined with the program WINGRAF.
3-14 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
All sections are saved in the database. They can be checked and changed with the program
WINGRAF.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-15SIR|InputDescription
3.10 ECHO – Output Control
ECHO
Item Description Unit Default
OPT A literal from the following list: LT -
FULL All options
GEO Geometry of the section YES
REAC Support reactions in the section NO
REIN QUAD reinforcements YES
FORC Internal forces and moments YES
YES total internal forces
FULL single components
EXTR singlecomponentswithcoordinates
LC Considered load cases YES
PLOT All grafic options *
NX Plot option normal force YES
VY Plot option shear force YES
VZ Plot option shear force YES
MX Plot option torsional moment YES
MY Plot option bending moment YES
MZ Plot option bending moment YES
V Plot option resultant shear force YES
M Plot option resultant moment YES
W Plot option warping parts YES
VAL Value of output option LT -
NO No output
YES Regular output
FULL Extensive output
The output of SIR consists of two tables for each section. The first table is optional and de-
scribes the geometry of the section and of all intersected elements.
The second table lists the sum of all resultant section components for each load case. The
user gets also the parts of all individual elements with ECHO FORC.
Agraphicalrepresentationmaybeproducedforeveryloadcaseandeverysectioncomponent.
3-16 SOFiSTiK2023InputDescription|SIR
The individual components may be switched on or off with PLOT or the suboptions NX to W.
The section definition and the forces for each load are saved in the data base for a later inter-
pretation. In this case all already existing SIR-dates in the data base are overwritten and/or
deleted.
SOFiSTiK2023 3-17SIR|InputDescription
3-18 SOFiSTiK2023OutputDescription|SIR
4 Output Description
ThecontentandtheextentoftheoutputaredependentonthedefinitionoftherecordECHO.
4.1 List of the Forces and Moments
ThelistoftheforcesandmomentsisoutputwithECHOFORCYES.Theoverallinternalforces
andmoments(typeSUM)ofthesingleloadcasesatthesectionsdefinedintherecordsSECT
are printed.
FORCES AND MOMENTS
section Section number
XS Beam ordinate
LC Load case number
Type Element type (e.g. QUAD) or SUM for the forces
and moments of all elements types
No Element number of the intersected elements
N[kN] Normal force
Vy[kN] Shear force
Vz[kN] Shear force
Mt[kNm] Torsional moment
My[kNm] Bending moment
Mz[kNm] Bending moment
Mb[kNm2] Warping moment
The single forces and moments with the element type and the used load cases are output
additionally with the input ECHO FORC FULL.
The type SUPPORTS with the sum of corresponding nodal forces and moments is printed
additionallyperloadcaseinthelistoftheforcesandmomentsconsideringECHOREACYES,
FULL or EXTR. All nodes inside the section box are used, independend of the group control.
WithECHOREACEXTRorECHOREAC4theresultingforcesofbeddingoftheareaelements
are added. The used area elements are dependend from the group control.
4.2 List of the Section Geometry
The list of the section geometry is output with the input ECHO GEO FULL.
SECTIONAL GEOMETRY
section Section number
XS Beam ordinate
Coordinate Coordiante type X, Y or Z
SOFiSTiK2023 4-1SIR|OutputDescription
center Value of the corresponding coordinate
minimum Depth of the section box for support reactions,
maximum local coordinates of the active window of the sec-
tion plane with reference to the reference
point
local directions
Type Element type (e.g. QUAD, BEAM)
No Element number
ya[m] , za[m] Distances to the reference node
ye[m] , ze[m]
A[m2] area
t[m] Element thickness
x[−] Interpolation factor beam length
4.3 List of the Considered Load Cases
The list of the considered load cases appears with the input ECHO LC YES or FULL.
CONSIDERED LOAD CASES
LC Load case number
CSMI smallest prestressed construction stage
CSMA largest prestressed construction stage
Title of loading case
4.4 AQUA and AQB Input
The results of SIR can be stored in an input file for the programs AQUA and AQBS for the
use of a classical beam design. The kind and the extent of these dates are described with the
corresponding CTRL options.
4.5 Graphical Representations
The corresponding force and moment distributions are represented graphically in Report
Browser output with the input ECHO PLOT YES or ECHO NX to W YES.
4-2 SOFiSTiK2023